This morning, I was discussing with you some of the basic ideas and feelings of Chinese philosophy
and in particular Taoism, which underlie the development of Zen Buddhism and which underlie
the whole Chinese attitude to life, to nature and to art.
And I suppose of all these ideas that I discussed with you in the morning, the most important
was the one of the mutual arising of things.
That is to say that you and your world go together in the same way as bees and flowers.
But that we are not brought up in at any rate our culture to feel this.
We don't have a sensation of it.
We have instead a sensation of confronting the world of nature, of something alien, something
outside into which we come, rather than out of which we come.
But it's possible so to change your everyday consciousness that you feel yourself as something
that the universe is doing.
It's as if you changed your center of gravity, your center of operations from that little
man inside the head called the ego to the whole work, doing it.
Now then what I want to do this afternoon is shift from Taoism later on in time to the introduction
of Buddhism into China and the birth of Zen and to see what Chinese Zen is.
You do though first have to have a short look at what Buddhism is as a product of India.
It has been well said that Buddhism is Hinduism stripped for export.
See Hinduism is a way of life that goes far far beyond what we in the West call religion.
It involves cookery, everyday family life, house building, just everything.
It's the whole Hindu way of life and so you can't export it.
Just as you can't export Shinto from Japan and belongs to the soil and the culture.
But there are essential elements in it that can be transmitted outside the culture of India.
And Buddhism was one of the ways of doing just that.
So one might say simply this to try and sum up what Buddhism is about.
The word Buddha is derived from the root, Buddha and Sanskrit, BUDH, which means to be awake.
So the Buddha is the awakened man, the man who woke up.
What does he wake up from, obviously a dream?
What kind of a dream is this?
Well, I would call it a state of hypnosis.
And the state of hypnosis, although I'm using hypnosis in a rather archaic sense of the word,
is a state of being entranced, spellbound, fascinated.
And this is called in Sanskrit avidya, a, v, i, d, y, a.
Vidya is knowledge in Sanskrit and it is the root from which we get vidhari in Latin to see.
And so vision in English.
So are they putting the A in front of it means non?
Avidya, not seeing ignorance, ignorance.
I was discussing that this morning.
Where you see but you ignore everything that you're not looking at.
When you put the beak of a chicken on a white chalk line
and the chicken is fascinated with that and can't get away from the chalk line, that's avidya.
So in the same way our beaks were put on a chalk line.
When we were hypnotized into the notion of attending to life by conscious attention alone,
by the spotlight to the exclusion of the floodlight.
And so we began to imagine that we were separate individuals.
What is called in Buddhism, Sakaya Dhrishti, the view of separateness.
And a Buddha is one who has overcome that.
He is awakened from that illusion, from that state of hypnosis.
And he knows that, well, I can't put what he knows in any positive terms.
This is the special thing about Buddhism.
Everything in Buddhism sounds negative.
Let's put it this way.
Let's suppose you engage yourself in a relationship with the Buddha.
All with one, I mean, there are hundreds of Buddhas.
One we call Gautama is just the historical Buddha that everybody knows about.
But one Buddha leads to another, because as a result of his relationships with people,
he turns them into Buddhas too, awakened people.
You meet one of these people, and he's going to give you a rough time.
But one of the Buddhas running around these days is Krishnamurti.
And Krishnamurti absolutely destroys everybody's religion.
Why do you believe this?
Why are you hanging on to that?
Why do you want to insist that this idea is so?
And he shows you that all your fixed formulations, all the ideas to which you cling, are spurious.
And then you suddenly get into a kind of vertical,
disinous, that you feel suddenly, that you're no longer standing on the firm ground,
but that the universe has suddenly turned into water, or worse air,
or worse still empty space.
There's nothing to hold on to.
Now, you see, often when one discusses religion with people, they say,
well, I need a religion because I need something to hold on to.
Well, that's the way not to use a religion,
because if you use religion as something to hold on to,
your religion is an expression of unfaith.
Faith is where you let go, not where you hold on.
When the cat falls off the tree, the cat relaxes, you see.
And so the cat lands with a soft thud, and doesn't get hurt, because the cat has faith.
But if the cat in mid-air would suddenly to grab itself with all four feet
and tighten up, you see, it'd be hurt.
And that's what people do when they say, rock-a-vader's cleft for me, let me hide myself and be.
They want something to hold on to, you see.
And that is unfaith.
So the method of Buddhism, let's call the Dharma,
doesn't mean the law, it means the method.
The method is to not be stuffing out of you.
To take away everything to which you cling,
to cleanse you completely of all beliefs, all ideas, all concepts of what life is about.
So that you are completely let go.
So Buddhism has no doctrines at all,
but you have to believe it.
And don't care what background you come from, whether you're a Roman Catholic or a one-ing
stream or a logical positivist at the other.
Both are clinging to something, you see.
And so the method of Buddhism is to knock out the underpinnings
and say, well, we're just not only do we not believe in anything.
We don't even believe in not believing in anything.
You know, you crawl into a hole and pull the hole in after you.
But in this case, you do the exact opposite of that.
That's a defensive move to crawl into a hole.
In this way, you crawl into great space
and then pull the space out after you.
And to go through this is pretty, pretty rough
because you can do it on what seems at first
to be a merely intellectual level.
So you can engage a group of people in the discussion
and you can start whenever they propose an idea that is their guiding principle of life.
You demolish it, show that it doesn't hold water.
And step by step, you unearth by talking with them,
what are the fundamental ideas they're operating on?
Everybody is.
Everybody is a philosopher.
Everybody has metaphysics, or they may not know what it is.
They've never examined it.
But by this method, you bring it out and you demolish it.
And this suddenly, what seemed like a very nice intellectual discussion
turns into sheer murder.
People get really anxious.
They develop all the trembles and the symptoms of extreme anxiety.
And so they finally say to the guru for the teacher,
well, heaven says, what are you believe in?
Is this not not proposing anything?
I didn't set anything up.
Well, how do you navigate?
How do you exist?
This is what's the problem?
Because you see what we're moving from,
as I suggested a moment ago, we're moving from a state of affairs
where we're accustomed to navigation on land
to a state of affairs where we're in the water.
And this is very critical for today,
because the impact of modern science on Western culture
has been very similar to this in Christianity.
We sing hymns like how firm a foundation
and rock of ages, I infest the book and mighty fortresses our god.
We've summing to stand up, the church is one foundation
is Jesus Christ her Lord, you know?
And this firm thing, all right, suddenly,
all that disappears, or becomes implausible.
And we find ourselves swimming or sinking.
Now, when you find that you're living in the meeting,
it's the University of Relativity,
but there's nothing you could hold on to.
You've got to learn how to swim.
And to swim, you've got to relax and stop, stop grabbing.
So this is what Buddhism does.
When it says, it's the art of let go of non-attachment,
non-attachment doesn't mean that you lose your appetite for dinner.
It means simply that you stop grabbing.
You get rid of stickiness.
Stickiness in the sense of, for example,
when a wheel has an axle that's too tight and it sticks.
Want to loosen it up a bit.
You don't want it too loose, you don't want it floppy.
A lot of people, when they tell them to relax,
they become like a limb-brage.
It's not relaxing.
Relaxing is having still tone,
but it's a certain, it's a middle way.
So this is what Buddhism is about.
It's about learning, for example, if I may put it in a vivid way,
when you were born, you were kicked off a precipice.
And there's nothing that can stop you falling.
And although there are a lot of rocks falling with you,
with trees growing on them, and all sorts of things like that,
you can cling to one of those rocks, if you like,
as it goes down with you, for safety.
But it's not safe.
Nothing is safe.
Everything is falling apart.
Everything isn't in a state of change.
And there's no way of stopping it.
And when you are really resigned to that,
and when you really accept that,
then there's nothing left to be afraid of.
And when there's nothing left to be afraid of,
and you've given everything up,
and you know that even a lot of people in religion
cling to suffering, because they know they are right as long as they hurt.
And why bless the good Lord for my boils,
for my mental and bodily payings.
For without them, my faith all congeels,
and I am doomed to hells, narrow ending flames.
You know, a lot of people who know that they're right
so long as they suffer.
But that's an illusion too.
Even suffering offers no security.
Even suicide offers no security in Buddhism, you see?
There is no security at all.
You simply have to face this fact
that everything is in flux, and go, go, go, go with it.
And so, and the question then is simply,
how to convince people of us,
if anybody wants to be convinced?
You know, it's not the sort of thing you shove down people's throats.
You don't convert them to this,
because if they don't want to be converted, they won't let go.
So Buddhism therefore involves a very special relationship
between the questioner
and the person to whom the question is addressed.
The pupil in the teacher.
And now then, Buddhism came to China as early as 60 AD,
but didn't at that time make a very great impression.
It was not until about the year 400,
that a very great Sanskrit scholar by the name of Kumara Jiva came
and started teaching Chinese scholars Sanskrit.
And they worked with him to translate Sanskrit into Chinese.
And they translated the Buddhist scriptures.
They didn't, of course, do them all at that time,
because the Buddhist scriptures occupy about as many as much space
as the encyclopedia of Britannica, in fact, a little more.
The Indians are great talkers.
Well, anyway, they found that when they translate this into Chinese,
they had to find equivalent Chinese words for the Sanskrit ideas,
and they found these from the Taoist philosophy that I discussed this morning.
Well, slowly then, Indian attitudes began to be modified
by Chinese attitudes, because the Chinese read into these translations,
Taoist meanings.
So things got a little altered.
Now, here came the alteration that is crucial.
First of all, in Indian Buddhism, there's very little human.
But Chinese life is full of human.
The greatest philosopher of China, Joans are, you know,
is the only philosopher who is, in, I think, in the whole world,
who is profoundly humorous, there's a book in a modern library,
published by Random House, called the Wisdom of Loutser,
and this is translated by Lin Yutang,
and he includes, along with the translation of Loutser,
huge sections of Trans-R.
And this is absolutely fascinating, because of the humor of it.
Indian Buddhism had very little human.
Some, yes, but very little.
Next, it was all tied up with celibacy.
Which to the Chinese was absolutely incomprehensible.
Because Chinese civilization is rigged around the family,
to a far greater extent than ours is,
which is saying something.
And they could just couldn't see any point or any wisdom in celibacy.
When Buddhism came to China,
it still retained a certain element of celibacy.
But for different reasons than Hindu,
the Chinese way of celibacy is not that sex is naughty,
but it's terribly convenient not to have a wife.
In other words, the ideal of the uninvolved life
has a certain appeal, but they could never never get through into their heads,
the notion that sexual desire was bad.
Which plays as always played a fairly strong role in Hindu thinking.
And not in the same way as it has in the West.
They don't have the Hindus, don't have a guilt take on it.
But they think that it dissipates your spiritual energies.
And you see that in yoga,
they envisage the idea that at the base of the spine,
there is what is called the Kundalini,
the serpent power, or the force of psychic energy.
And so long as it remains at the base of the spine,
this force is dissipated in sexuality.
Now, yoga is to suck this thing up the spine and get it into the head.
And so then you withdraw from the manifestation of this energy,
or the dissipation of it, in sexuality, and it's put on a higher level,
only which end is up.
You can do it the other way too.
They have what's called the right hand way of doing it,
and the left hand way of doing it.
I'm not going to go into that now.
But the Chinese didn't see it that way.
They couldn't see that it was a dissipation of energy.
So what they wanted to aim at was a way of living Buddhism and being awake.
But at the same time, remaining active in the ordinary life of the world.
It's what's called in their fragility,
being king on the outside and the sage on the inside.
Managing practical affairs completely involved in whatever life is.
But at the same time, inwardly, living on top of a mountain,
being cloud hidden whereabouts unknown.
So Chinese Zen is the preeminent expression of this,
because it is the mixture of Indian Buddhism and Chinese Taoism,
plus a certain confusion practicality.
Zen developed out of the work of Kumara Jiva,
came into China, as I said, for 400 or little before.
He had two disciples who began to work on Buddhism from a Taoist point of view,
and they were actually the originators of Zen.
Then, apparently, about a shortly before 500 is the dates now check out.
Another Indian came to China, whose name was Bodhi Darma.
And Bodhi Darma was the person who touched off Zen as a specific movement.
Bodhi Darma had a pupil by the name of Aka, Quake and Chinese Aka's Japanese pronunciation.
Like Zen is the Japanese pronunciation of the Chinese chan.
And the story is that when Aka came to Bodhi Darma, Bodhi Darma refused to accept him as a student,
all Zen masters do this. They reject you.
And this stimulates you to come back stronger.
I mean, if you're going to learn at all, and Aka came back stronger and stronger and stronger,
and Bodhi Darma resisted him stronger and finally, he cut off his left arm,
and presented it to Bodhi Darma and said, look, here's my left arm given to you as a token,
that nothing in the world matters to me except to find out what you're all about.
All right, he said, what do you want to know? Aka said, I have no peace of mind,
please pacify my mind. In Chinese, the mind is this word pronounced shin, and shin is here.
shin is the hot mind, it's the psychic center, and so Bodhi Darma said, bring out your shin,
here before me, and I will pacify it. Aka said, when I look for it, I can't find it. Bodhi Darma said,
then it's pacified. And Aka immediately understood what all the thing was about.
That's the experience called Satori in Japanese, Wu in Chinese, Mandarin, and then the
Cantonese dialect.
What we call in our modern psychological jargon, the A-half phenomenon.
The A-half phenomenon, A-half, now I see.
Well, now what was all this? This Zen, which in Chinese is this character,
is a translation of the Sanskrit word Yana, and so this is being pronounced
chan in Chinese, and Zen in Japanese, is unfortunately untranslatable in English.
It designates a certain state of consciousness, that is sometimes called meditation,
but that won't do at all. Contemplation isn't really the point. The Chinese have a different
word for contemplation. And sometimes one pointedness of mind, I would prefer to translate this word
within notion of total presence of mind. When we say a person is crazy, we often say they're not
all there. Now go to the opposite of that and visualize a person who is completely there or who is
completely here. A person who lives totally and absolutely now, that doesn't mean he's incapable of
thinking about the past or the future, because thoughts about the past and about the future are
included in the present. You have them now, but imagine the kind of person who is not distracted,
who when he talks to you, it really gives you his whole being, who doesn't as it were,
look over your shoulder and wander after something else. Somebody who, first of all, he's completely
here and he's so much here that you can't phase him. Now this idea of phasing is crucial in Zen.
You see, I refer to a moment ago to attachment. The Buddhism is living free from attachments,
and I have made the point that this is not abandoning a sense of a good appetite for dinner,
but it's stopping sticking in psychological jargon, you don't block.
A mind of no hesitation that sometimes called in Chinese, the phrase Mocha Chu is used of going straight ahead.
So, supposing somebody walks up to you on the street and says, are you saved?
Now most of us who are intelligent people feel embarrassed by such a question.
You know, was this Richard Salvation Army person, or Jehovah's Witness,
doing asking me whether I'm saved or not? And we're all little bit, you know, what do you do with
a nut like that? So, but as Zen, this is a perfect moment to respond to the most embarrassing
question, are you saved? But Zen comes back in a very funny way. In Zen, one doesn't give
a philosophical answer to a question like that. You give practical answers. I had a boiled egg this morning.
Because whenever you are asked about matters sacred, theoretical and philosophical,
you answer in terms of things earthy and practical. But then on the other hand, when you are asked
about things earthy and practical, you answer in terms of things religious and philosophical.
Is dinner ready? You know, who's asking this question? Who are you?
So, this is then the flavour of Zen is, you know, a body dharma is supposed to have meditated
so long that his legs fell off. And he's usually drawn this way, something like this anyway.
It looks like a schmoo. But in Japan, you buy these toys at our dowrymons. And they are so
weighted in here that you can never knock them over. You can bet it on the floor, bet it this way,
bet it that way, but it always comes up again. And so the poem says, seven times down,
eight times up, such as life. So, this is the principle of not being phased, not being attached.
So, to play the game, you can't phase me. This is a very important in the art of
lifemanship. Fundamental gamesmanship, because you see, when the Zen monks moved into Kyoto,
they took over the best part of town, simply fantastic how this happened. The beautiful hills
that I was talking about this morning were occupied by the brigands. We later became the Japanese
nobility. The great diameters, these were the toughest characters. And these Zen monks played
a game with them, which was that, you know, you possess all these lands and you're powerful. And so on.
But so what? It's all falling apart. Then what will you do? Well, they said, that's too bad. We don't know.
And the Zen monks said, oh, here you haven't got the hang of the things, you see?
So, they found that they couldn't terrify Zen monks. That they played all sorts of tricks,
but the Zen monks were better masters at it. See, supposing you say to somebody,
look, I'm not afraid of you. You can do anything you like. You can kill me or anything
as to at all. Well, if I go and kill the fellow who says this, I'll never find out,
whether he was afraid or not. So, they outface these people and said, you did, we have a secret.
You see that you don't have. And we'll teach your servitors to be great warriors because they'll
learn the secret too and they won't be afraid of anything. This is what they did. And so,
the Dhymeos, the Nobleman built great monasteries for these Zen masters and monks on their
best land. The finest artists of Japan made gold leaf screens for homeless every room in the
place, and although nobody owns anything individually, the community owns it collectively
with the protection of the Dhymeos. And they had a tremendous scene going.
Now to ask that sounds extremely weird. Even if moral, you don't expect religious people to
do things like that. No, I know you don't. If the religious people are self-righteous and have no
human, but these people didn't go around pretending that they were specially good.
They didn't do themselves. They were people who understood what human nature is. That in
every one of us, there is an element of irreducible rascality. In Jewish theology, this is called
the Yetzahara. Y E Z E are H-A-R-A. Yetzahara. The element of irreducible rascality, which was created
by God, because God has one too. And that's why when you are really affectionate with somebody else.
When, for example, men, I don't know what women do in their private lives between each other,
but men, as we all know, say to someone they are very fond of, why you all bastard. You know?
Just like that. There's a certain way of saying to a person, there's a certain
glint of recognition. So there's a Zen poem which says, when two Zen masters meet each other on
the road, they need no introduction. When a thief meets a thief, they recognize each other instantly.
And this goes back, you see again, into the heart of Chinese philosophy. That human nature
is considered to be basically good. And even the rascally elements of it are good. They are
the sort of salt in the human stew. There has to be this little thing that human passions,
and that the natural, our contentiousness and greed or whatever that we have, is an essential
element in our makeup. And that when people lose sight of that, they go mad. Nothing, for example,
is more dangerous than a saint. You have to say, an unconscious saint who thinks that he is right
and who endeaves to live an absolutely pure life and to eliminate all selfish thoughts.
Somebody who undertakes that task is going to be immense to all around because he loses his human.
He loses his real humility, which is knowing that after all since we are humans, we have certain
needs, we need to eat, we need sex, we need this, that and the other. And this sort of
equality of human to it. And so this is why in Zen art, the sages are always drawn to look a
little bit like bombs. You know that Plutai or Hote as he's called, what's called the laughing
Buddha, the fat Buddha with an immense belly and carrying around an enormous bag of rubbish.
We into which he indiscriminately puts anything he finds around and then gives it a way to children.
This is the sort of type which the Chinese call the old rogue. And the old rogue as a type of
the poet, sage, monk and scholar, you see, is greatly admired. He's the nonviolent brigadant.
The rolling stone, the free man. Or in our words, the joker. The joker you see is the card that
can be play any role in the pack. So then Zen developed in China after Bodhi Dalman's time
and came to a sort of golden age in the tongue and sung dynasty. The golden age of Zen lies
between 713 AD and approximately 1100, 1200. That's the great creative period in which all
the marvellous masters emerged and during which Zen exercised a profound influence on the
development of Chinese poetry, painting, calligraphy and scholarship. Then between 11 and 1200,
it shifted to Japan and underwent a new development, rather different in quality and in tone.
And after it had done that for some curious reason which is very complicated historical
question, it slowly faded away in China. So that as we find it today, it is principally a
Japanese phenomenon and it is slowly fading in Japan and slowly growing in the West. It's very
funny thing. Now then let me indicate what Zen training, what its method is, how does it work?
I said before, what is involved as a dialogue and interchange between two people?
One who is defined in self as a student and has therefore defined the other as the teacher.
There is no teacher until a student arrives. No problem until a question is raised.
So students create teachers.
This is very funny. We have a saying, anybody who goes to a psychiatrist or start to have his
head examined. You can interpret that as you are an idiot to go to a psychiatrist because they are
a bunch of charlatans. But the subtler meaning of it is, yes, if you define yourself as being
in need of help, you need a psychiatrist. They say exactly the same thing in Zen.
If you ask a question, you get 30 blows with a stick. If you don't ask a question, you get 30 blows with a stick.
Because you've simply put yourself in stuttoopopillary, you've defined yourself as having a problem.
Now nobody really has a problem. But the Maya, the game of life is to pretend that you do.
Going back to fundamental Hinduism, the godhead of the self pretends it's all of us.
And so gets lost and so has a ball. Dreams all are going on.
So when you are on your way out from the dream, it's suddenly a curse to you that you have a problem.
Life is suffering. You would like to get out of this. So one such student went to a Zen
Master and he said, we have to dress and eat every day. And how do we get out of all that?
In other words, you might ask the question in this way. We have to work.
I'll get up, Monday morning, go to the office, do all this routine, sell something and so on.
How do we get out of the rat race? So we have to dress and eat every day. And how do we get rid of all that?
And the Master said, we dress, we eat.
And the student said, I don't understand. He replied, if you don't understand, put on your clothes and eat your food.
But no, this is the kind of dialogue so characteristic of Zen.
So the position is this. The Master on being approached by a student about the problem of life.
Says, I have nothing to teach you. I am a Zen Master. I have nothing to say. Zen is not words.
And furthermore, everything is perfectly clear.
There was a Confucian scholar who went to a Zen Master and said, what is your secret teaching?
And he replied, there is a saying in your own teacher Confucius, which explains it all,
didn't, don't you remember when Confucius said to his disciples, do you suppose that I'm
concealing something from you? I've held nothing back.
And the scholar didn't get this. So a few days later they were walking together in the mountains
and they passed the wild Laurel bush. And the Zen Master said to the Confucian scholar, do you smell it?
He said, yes. He said, you see, I'm holding nothing back.
So the position of the Zen Master is, there is nothing to tell you. There is no, we're not offering
you any panacea, any solution, any doctrine, any big, big goodie to the problem of life,
because the problem is in illusion. Well, then the student under these circumstances thinks,
well, this is some sort of a come on. He's testing my sincerity and, of course, the nothing,
which he has the teachers, the mystery of the great void. See, it does not, he doesn't take it as
many just plain old ordinary nothing, but the great void. And so he persists. And the teacher
makes him persist. Until he gets way out on a limb, he has to persists so much that he practically
dedicates his life, saying, just as a way, wake up, symbolically cut off his arm.
The student is put in the position of dedicating his life to solving this thing and getting what
that teacher adds. And of course, there wasn't anything all along, but he's been put in that position.
So, then, once he's in Statu Pupilari, once he becomes a student, he's put through all kinds
of hoops. They make him learn to meditate, to sit cross-legged, practice zazan, and then they also
add to the trouble by asking impossible questions, which are called koan. And these questions are
a palpably absurd. What they are saying essentially, at least the elementary koans are all concerned
with us, are requests for behavior on the part of the student that will be perfectly genuine.
In other words, show me who you are. Now, wait a minute, I don't want to see any social definition
of you. I don't want to know your name, your address, who your parents were. I want to see the
absolutely authentic you. It's like, or existentially, it's talk about authentic being.
Or it might be in the same way a confessor, father confessor in a Christian sense, but say,
now, give me a really good confession. What is the thing bad, bad thing you've really done?
And you confess to him, adulterism, murder, and theft, and sacrilege, and blasphemism,
cussing, and so on, and he says, oh, no, no, no, come off it. Those are a bit trivial things.
Come on, now, what is the really awful thing you've done?
I don't know what I mean.
This is the backwards way of doing exactly the same thing as enmasters doing.
Think, who are you really? Are you anybody? Is anybody home?
I have you got anything, and they do things like making you shout.
See, this word is very important word in Zen. Nothing.
Move. Oh, I had it on the other side of the board, but it's represented by the empty circle.
The word, move in Japanese, so they say, now, say it. Say, move. Move, you know, with all your guts
going into it. They say, no, no, no, no, you don't know how to say that. Come on, that's feeble.
That's nothing. That's really sad. They have every kind of trick like that.
To show you the more you make an effort to be genuine, the more of a fool you become.
They tie you up in knots until you're desperate. There was an American Zen student who was
on a full bright, and they gave him a year to start his end.
And he started to panic because he had only a month ago, and he hadn't realized it.
And he knew he had to, and he went to the send-masks and said, dammit, he said, look, I've
got a month left, and the master said, all right, we'll have what we call Ossession. Ossession
is an intense meditation practice, where you only sleep three hours a night, sort of thing,
and you meditate all the rest of the time. Let's go, let's really do it, do it, do it, do it.
And every day, three times you come to me and present the answer to your Zen problem, your
co-an, and it got worse, and it got worse, and it got worse, and he got more and more desperate.
That here was this full bright gun and he wouldn't know what Zen was all about.
We're back to the last day. He suddenly saw all there was nothing to see.
And it's all right, the way it is. And this tremendous illumination is load off his head.
It was, of course, what the master was trying to make him do.
And now in the ordinary way, if you're not on a full bright, and you were, you can stay around further,
and the master will then play a trick on you. You'll say, and now that's wonderful.
You got your foot in at the gate. You saw, you realize there's nothing to realize, you realize the void,
there's nothing to cling to, you see, there's no barriers, no blocks in any direction for all transparent.
But that is just the beginning.
Many, many, it's all an necessity now for you to discipline yourself much harder to make great efforts,
really to get through.
What are you going to do about that?
The student may say, well, I don't know.
I've had enough, I think, I've realized what it's all about, and he goes away.
Sometimes later, he begins to worry, because you see the great emotional relief of this insight begins to
wear off, and life begins to look ordinary again. And things that maybe I didn't miss something.
That was a very good master I went to, and I'd better go back.
So back he goes, and the teacher comes on, very, very tough, and says, you know, you're no good. You didn't stick with it. Why should I take you back?
Oh master, I'm so sorry, I didn't realize I was young and inexperienced tonight. Now I've come to my senses,
so the teacher finally says, all right, all right, all right, you're on probation.
Oh, again, he starts another call on, and this one comes in from a completely different point of view.
And he's got others that come from this way, and from this way, and from this way, and from this way.
And the point is always, so long as I can beg you as a teacher,
into thinking that something you could get, you need to study with me.
When I can no longer fool you into thinking that there's something to get out of life,
you'll know that you're alive. You don't get something out of it, you're it.
But so long as you can be phased, and you can be taken in, or the teacher, you need a teacher.
But so in the end, when the student no longer needs a teacher,
and he sees that his old boy has fooled him the whole way through, he says, at the same time,
profound respect and you wonderful rascal.
There's a very strange thing in the, I've poked around a good deal lately in Japan,
among American Zen students to find out what's going on.
And they tell me that the initial come on of a Zen master is very tough and very authoritarian and paternalistic.
But as you move in, he turns into your older brother,
and is a person you feel going right along with you beside you,
helping you in this thing full of friendship and compassion and everything.
But occasionally, he will suddenly turn and bring on the authoritarian stuff.
But they do it in a very strange way.
It was a Zen master who on the Saturday morning,
when he should have been woken up at 8 o'clock,
was woken up at 7,
or whatever the time was.
No, he should have been woken up at 8 on Saturdays and 7 on weekdays,
so this was a Saturday and his attendant monk came and woke him up at 8.
He was immediately looked at the clock,
it was absolutely furious that it had been woken up in our late because he didn't know it was Saturday.
So he struck out of this monk in a rage in the monk said, master, but it's Saturday.
He said, oh, anger disappeared, absolutely serene, no apologies.
So you see the nature of this game, just the Zen game.
And I seem to have given away the show to you,
told you all the inside mechanics of it,
but you would discover that if you tangle with a Zen master and you think,
you know from what I told you, what are the mechanics of it,
and you stuck your neck out to put yourself in the position of being an inquire.
Everything I told you would be useless.
He would out with you completely.
That's what consists in being a master.
He's not doing it because he wants to be superior and to put down other human beings.
He's doing it out of great compassion because he feels he knows something which, uh,
if you could find out, you would just be so happy.
And we want to give it to everybody else, which can't give it away because everybody's got it.
Much of got to make them do is to see that they have it and that you don't give it to them.
And that's the most difficult task.
Yesterday I was giving you a general outline of the foundations of
the Zen feeling for naturalness in art and life by describing the fundamental principles of the
Taoist philosophy and then of the Zen discipline itself.
And we saw that the roots of the idea of spontaneous living
making this conception or rather it isn't as much a conception as they're doing,
something much more subtle than might ordinarily be imagined.
A lot of people think that the spontaneous or completely natural life as it's understood by these
far Eastern philosophers is to act according to women.
There was, for example, a great Zen monk of the shortly after a thousand day,
who had a very peculiar way of painting. He had long hair and he would soak it, he'd get very
drunk on a rice wine, then he'd soak his hair in ink and slush it all over the paper.
Then he would do a raw shock test on it and decide what kind of a landscape it actually was
and then put in the finishing touches. And suddenly out of this apparent mess,
a great landscape would be evoked. But the whole out of the thing lay and putting in the finishing
touches. And also, there's a very curious thing. If a person who is untrained in painting
makes a mess with a brush, it's labelled to be just a mess. Whereas if a person who has the feeling
of painting in them for a long time and they make a mess with a brush or just do anything,
it looks interesting. And that's why if you try to copy the best people in modern abstract
non-objective painting, you'll find it's very difficult thing to do. Because there is more
to spontaneity than caprice and disorder. And I want to try and explain what that is.
I mean, wouldn't it be great if we could live absolutely on the spur of the moment?
Not making any particular plans, not feel that when you might make plans, because you could make
plans spontaneously. But not to worry about whether you had made the right decision, whether you
will be good or bad, selfish or unselfish, and not hesitate in anything. In one of the great
applications of Zen, as I pointed out, was to the art of fencing. And when you learn fencing,
you see you have to learn to be spontaneous, because here of all places it is true that he who
hesitates is lost. If you're engaged in combat, you see, and you stop to think what sort of
a defence or attack you ought to make, the enemy's got you. So the way they teach people spontaneity
in fencing is very interesting. When you start into fencing school, you of course live with the
teacher. He has a kind of ashron. And but you'll give in a janitorial job. You clean up,
you wash dishes, you put bedding away and things like that. While you're going about your daily
business, the master surprises you with a practice sword, which is made of four strips of bamboo,
rather loosely tied together. And he hits you with this, surprisingly, and suddenly, from nowhere.
And you were expected to defend yourself with anything available. With the bedding, with the broom,
with the parts and pans, with just anything, defend. But the poor student never knows when the attack
is coming, or what direction it's coming from, and he begins to get tense. And he begins to go around
everywhere on the sort of alert. You see, watching, watching, which direction it's coming from.
And as he goes down a certain passage, feeling that the master is probably looking around that
corner, and he's all set to go for him. And that, that gets that practice sword.
He's suddenly gets hit from behind. So eventually, he gives up. There's absolutely no way of
preparing for the attack. And so he just wanders around, feeling, well, if he hits, it's going to hit
his sword. And then he's ready to begin fencing. Because if you prepare for an attack from a
specific direction, and he comes from some other direction, you have to withdraw from the
direction in which you had expected it. And send your energy in another direction, and that takes time.
So what you do is, you go around with a mind of no expectation. That is called
Mushin, or Munen. This is a very important Zen expression. Mushin, it all
most means an empty mind. This move, no. It didn't rub the ink long enough this morning.
No shin. You could also call it no heart. Because the character shin means both heart and
mind, but it doesn't quite the same as our word, heartless as we use it. And it doesn't
the same as the word mindless as we use it, meaning stupid. To be in the state of Mushin is to
have a mind like a mirror. And of this, the Taoist sage Drung says, the perfect man
employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing, it refuses nothing, it receives, but does not keep.
And when anything comes in front of the mirror, it reflects it instantly. The mirror doesn't wait
to reflect it. They also say, when the moon rises, all bodies of water instantly reflect the moon.
I mean, they don't bother with physics about the speed of light or anything like that.
It's irrelevant. Or they say, when you clap your hands, the sound issues immediately.
It doesn't stop to consider whether it will issue. And so sparks from the flint when it struck
they issue instantly. But to do this, you can't try to be quick. See, if a Zenmaster corners you
with a funny situation, and he puts you in a quandary expecting spontaneous action from you,
don't try to hurry. I know I've watched Suzuki wait a whole minute before answering,
but he doesn't hesitate. He's not in tall embarrassed by this wait, and he can answer with silence
just as well as with a formal response. The point is, do something. When two young Americans want
to start his end, they were taken by a Japanese monk to interview the Master and act as interpreter.
And one of them had had some practice, you know, he knew a bit about it. And so after they had
teed together and just discussed formalities, the Master said in a very easy way, well, what do
you gentlemen know about Zen? And one of these students threw his fan, which he hadn't unfolded,
the fan was still folded up. He threw it straight at the Master's face. The Master slightly moved
to one side, and the fan went right through the paper wall, and the Master laughed like a child.
That's the sort of game they get in. Once a Master was going around through the forest with a group
of students, and he picked up a tree branch, who noticed that one might pick up a tree branch,
and suddenly he turned to one of his students and said, what is it? And he hesitated, so he hit it
with the branch. And so another student, he was there, and he turned him quickly. He said,
what is it? He said, give it to me, I want to see it. I'll tell you. So the Master tossed the
branch to him and he took it and hit the Master. Now you may think all this is kind of rough stuff.
But let me give you another story, which is on a rather different level.
A certain Zen priest was having dinner at a big party, and the party was being served by a
gaysha girl who was so elegant and so skillful in serving that he suspected she might have
had some Zen training. And so he decided to try her out. And he nodded to her and she immediately
came to his place and sat down in front of his little low table. So everybody was would be seated
probably in front of low tables all around a room and the gaysha servants and people move up
and down in the middle. And so she came down and sat down in front of him and bowed and he said,
I would like to give you a present. And she said, I would be most honored. Now on the table,
there are Hibachi, which are little breezes with hot charcoal in and you move the charcoal around
with iron chopsticks. He took a piece of charcoal out and iron chopsticks and offered it to her.
She had long long sleeves on her kimono and what she did was this. She wound them all around her hands
and took the charcoal. Immediately got up and went to the kitchen, disposed of the charcoal,
changed her robe which had holes burned all of them up all the way through the sleeves and came back.
And she sat down in front of the master and bowed and he said, and she said to him, I would like to
give you a present. He said, I would be most honored. And so she picked up the iron chopsticks and
handed him the charcoal and he pulled out a cigarette and said, that's just what I wanted and that
is the cigarette. Now, here's the lesson. The master's spontaneity and being ready for that situation
was the kind of quick thinking that a good comedian has who in a completely unprepared way
can make all sorts of jokes and turn any situation to adjust of some kind. There are all sorts of
people who do that. People who are experts in kind with like Dorothy Parker in that sort of
reparty, but here it's been developed in a very fundamental way and to a very high degree.
Now, the way in which it's developed, you see, requires a protected situation.
Because if we all started to act on this part of the moment without the slightest consideration or deliberation,
no, no, no, no, no, no, okay, you come with me now and if we all started to act on pure whim,
everybody would think we were crazy and that people would avoid us and call the police and things like that.
But what they do is this, they start you doing this in the context of a disciplined situation
where there are very rigid rules for most of the time that there are certain instance at which all
those rules go hang and you're in a community which understands the game because the point is this
when you start acting spontaneously, you're not used to doing it and therefore your responses are
unintelligent and inappropriate. But when you become used to doing this and when it becomes second nature
to you to act in the state of motion of no mind or no deliberation, then your behavior has matured
and you find that you're accustomed to respond quite appropriately as the Zenmaster did in lighting his cigarette from the charcoal.
So also in learning the art of swordsmanship, when he has given up defending himself
and when he's given up defending himself and preparing his mind for attack, then he's got a mirror
mind and this is also likened to a vessel of water like a wooden barrel. When you make a hole in the
barrel the water instantly flows out of the hole because the water is always available to come out.
It doesn't have to choose and so you could also say that motion is what Christiana Murty calls
choicelessness and because you see choice in this sense is not quite the same thing as decision.
Choice means dithering. You know there are some people who before they start to write something down
they wiggle their pens a little. Pen dithers over the paper and then they start to write
and so in the same way a lot of people in the constantly in the life situation they dither because that dithering is anxiety
to be or not to be that is the question. Well there is no question about to be or not to be
see because to be and not to be go together as we saw their rise mutually and
so kidding I don't think you're feeling very comfortable. I don't want to get mixed up in the
technical court. So then in the situation of the Zen community safe cards are set up
within which you can learn how to act without deliberation which is you see in a sense going back
to the state of innocence. Now it doesn't mean that you give up thinking. It doesn't mean that you
become an anti-intellectual. You all can also learn and this is part of the later phases of
Zen training. How to think spontaneously. How to deliberate spontaneously. The saying is you see stand
or walk as you will but whatever you do don't wobble. So this is our difficulty because the human
mind has is a feedback system. Feedback has a peculiar susceptibility to nervousness.
There was a young man who said though it seems that I know that I know what I would like to see
is the eye that knows me when I know that I know that I know. See now in this way we think about thinking
we worry about worrying and then when that really gets bad you worry because you worry about worrying
now that is analogous exactly to the kinds of vibration that are set up in certain mechanical
systems. For example if you I did this trick on television once I had the camera man
turned the camera on the monitor. The monitor is the television set in the studio where you see
what you are doing. And so on this show I said now I'm going to show you a picture of anxiety.
Don't worry about your sets there's nothing not going to be anything wrong with your sets
so don't turn it off. Now I said Mr. Camera man will you please turn the camera on the monitor.
He does that and what does he do? He's taking a picture of taking a picture
all in the same system. And as you do that the system starts going
like that. You see it makes sense up kind of oscillation and you see on the screen all these
jagged lines dancing across. Now that's what's meant you see by hesitation attachment blocking
all that kind of thing which the Zen discipline is designed to overcome. And because the human being
is such a peculiarly beautifully organized nervous system and has this tremendously subtle
cortex which is capable of all kinds of thinking about thinking. You can turn yourself on in
the most extraordinary ways by for example getting earphones which repeat what you say just a
fraction of a second after you say it back to you they delay it and you can get an oscilloscope
tied up with your own heartbeats and get feedback through in this way so that you suddenly
begin to see yourself behaving and it completely balls you up because you wait for yourself
to go on but then you realize it's you doing it but you can't wait on your heartbeat you can't
wait on what you say and you get this sensation of going faster and faster and faster and faster
until you just have to close the whole thing off you'll go crazy. So that's what we're doing
and our civilization and our social institutions reflect this in hundreds of ways
and this would be true of any civilization because all civilization is based on the development
of consciousness and feedback that is to say the property of self-control are being self-conscious
looking at what you've done and then being able to criticize it and correct it but who criticizes
is the critic reliable when you criticize yourself who will criticize the critic you see
or to put it in the other way Chris custodiate it says custodia is who will guard the
guards themselves who will take care of the policeman who will govern the president
and that is the big problem and when we get tied up in that problem the Chinese got tied up
and it because they were simply a very high order of civilization so did the Japanese
there has to be a break somebody has to start throwing things otherwise everybody will go insane
so Zen functions in that culture as a way of liberation from the tango of being too civilized
now you see in Japanese culture people are tremendously concerned with propriety
with good manners and with keeping up with the Joneses
one of the funniest things in the world is to watch Japanese people having a bowing contest
it's a very frequent thing when friends meet or take leave they go
and they bow and they bow and they respond because back at fourth and see who gets the last one
in because I'm more polite than you and the worries about when somebody comes you know we visit a
family who always bring a gift and they start worrying is this gift suitable
what is it anything as good as the gift they last gave us and is it right for the occasion
have we thought about it enough is there some symbolism in this gift that connects with this
person's name or their birthday or something like that and they think about these things
it terminate and thus they cultivate it in the the ordinary culture has a great deal of social
nervousness in it people giggle you often see girls who giggle and cover their mouths to say
I'm not really giggling all sorts of funny things happen because of this immense
social awareness and nervousness
now Zen breaks that up only it does it in a way that is as high artistry to it
so you see in let's just take the the aesthetic domain for the moment and you remember I was
discussing yesterday one table and you remember too that in the whole history of ceramics
the Chinese developed some of the most elegant work imaginable
you are probably aware I don't see a specimen of the great work of the sun and Korean
potters very often done in a jade like green the most gorgeous texture
it looked practically as if it was carved out of jade well that led on you see to the the
high techniques of the Ming dynasty with translucent porcelain white clay
the most subtle designs of all and that style went also to japan and the very very rich people
you read about in say books like the tale of genji and you see in a film and you must see it
Tushingura the story of the 47 Ronin the lovely things they had around their houses were unbelievable
the lacquer the boxes in pure gold and you know it was delicious stuff
but then it was just like having too much egg layers and ice cream and filet
mignon and cooked alacave you know that French cook who made everything look like an
oriental palace and now what happened the people who practiced then suddenly got an eye
for the beauty of the ordinary there were two reasons for this one was that they
became fascinated with what happened spontaneously what pattern a brush would make when handled
roughly in the hairlines were shown they also because they practiced sarsin which is sitting quietly
not thinking of anything special but having a completely open mind that puts you into a state
where you get much better eyes and ears than you ordinarily have and you start really seeing things
so you know that famous high coup poem the old pond a frog jumps in
and plop and Japanese that plop is masonal thought sound of the water and there's another poem
just like it in the dark forest a berry drops the sound of the water
some of the suddenly realized you see just the sound of the water is marvellous
that's all or they found that they kept getting in very very cheap Korean
rice bowls the poorest cheapest kind for peasants to eat out of and suddenly it struck one
of these Zen masters that that was an incomparably beautiful object nobody had seen this before
they also had the simplest wooden ladles bamboo and then a stick in it for use in the kitchen
and one day somebody noticed that this ordinary everyday kitchen utensil was just lovely
and so in the same way they found that it was quite a satisfactory to listen to the kettle boiling
as to listen to an elaborate concept so what did they do they started through particularly a
man called Senna Rikyu to give parties for very small few guests in shacks little pots
in the garden made of very primitive materials such as mud walls
and where they were going sit and out of the simplest utensils carefully chosen by a
superb artist they would simply sit and enjoy the uncomplicated life and so was born the tea ceremony
now look at that you see in the historical context that's terribly important it was a going back
to the primitive after people was sick of too much civilization and yet it was going on to the
primitive rather than back because the people who selected all those things they knew the whole
tradition of their civilization their culture they went barbarians once upon a time then then
you see when this became the rage Rikyu became attached to the court the sugar had tea with the
Rikyu and everybody started getting digging tea ceremony and in due course the whole thing became awful
because what's happened today is this tea ceremony is essentially something to enjoy
and there are a few men left who know how to serve tea ceremony and it's an extremely
congenial quiet get together of easy conversation simple and unostintacious manners and really lovely
things to look at I was present at a tea ceremony celebrated by his end monk who happens to be an American
and he is a man who has done a lot of mountaineering and he has therefore with him at all times
the sort of equipment that you take on camping in the mountains because he does a lot of climbing in Japan
and I said to him once you this afternoon we very nice to have a tea ceremony and you did it once before
here and it was so pleasant would you serve it again he said yes by only before he had served
tea ceremony in the style that Zen monks do it which is rather simple and direct and much more comfortable
than all these well educated ladies who are un-tittering about it on tiptoe and nervous and hoping
they won't make a mistake and all that kind of thing is dreadful so he suddenly came in
with a small primer stove set that down then he had an old paint pot which had inside it an
aluminum mug he set that down he then proceeded to take the aluminum mug out poor water into the paint
pot and set that on the primer stove but he ritually pumped up the primer stove he did everything
in the style of tea ceremony that this was a dirty old primer stove and suddenly the thing began to
flame like the god fudo and he mixed the tea in the traditional way with the whisk had all the
perfect lovely manners handing us the aluminum cup and we got into a long it's the custom
after the tea ceremony after drunk to pass all the utensils round for inspection this is exactly
what happened and we found that the aluminum cup had the year 1945 stepped on it was
operation we got into a discussion about styles of aluminum cups made in 1945 and it was the funniest
thing but it was a complete makeover of the tea ceremony into the modern idiom of course the tea
drunk in tea ceremony is that powdered green tea which you don't steep like you make ordinary tea
you whisk it a mixed with a small amount of hot water into a froth and it's called liquid jade
and it's a bit of an acquired taste for most westerners a taste a little bit like a mixture of
Matty and Guinness but when you get to know it it's very invigorating and very awakening
and if you make up a strong mixture of it it's a good thing to use if you want to stay awake or
night and do work and so we see it's the legend was that Zen monks started this interest in tea
because they needed it to kiss their wake during their practice of meditation and it said that
Bodhi Darma whom I drew for you yesterday and he's always drawn with eyes that are wide open
wide because he hasn't got me eyelids once when he was meditating he fell asleep and he was furious
and cut his eyelids off and as they dropped on the ground up came the first tea plants that's why
they have leaves shaped like eyelids and our arms are to be drunk ever thereafter for staying awake
so the plant of Buddhism but tea is the Buddhist drink just like wine is the Christian drink
coffee is the Islamic drink and milk the Hindu drink I very religion has it as it's drink
so then around this kind of appreciation born of stillness and the delight in seeing
how nature takes its cause came the entire cult of Zen art with its special kind of
productivity it's special ceramics it's special caligraphic styles and it's special gardens
which are the controlled accident now you see
as I showed you yesterday on that other tea bowl this is a water jar and they they like to leave
the bottom un glazed you can really see that it's played that way but look you see how
the glaze has been allowed to run is that we would call not need at all and you watch somebody
make one of these and I have watched their man just pick up the plate and as he applies the design of
the glaze he just goes push with the brush and lets it drop on and it's done there's another man
who glazes by wood smoke and in his kiln he may put about 1100 pieces and he wraps them
in straw and wherever the straw touches it leaves the splash of orange colour
against a purple background now you see the straw arrange itself according to the nature of
straw it doesn't follow strict human direction and the fascination is when they open up that
kiln and bring the things out they look eagerly to see what is the straw down so this
principle of letting glaze run to see what will happen is we're way this is not interference this is
motion also no purpose or it can also be translated no specific intent and now of course you see
sometimes this doesn't work and the master picks it up and says that's not very interesting
and rejected what are the canons of taste which decide whether he will accept one of these accidents
or reject it because here an additional principle of control enters see say in the practice of
calligraphy a man may sit down with a huge pile of paper in front of him and do peace after
peace after peace and if it isn't just right he throws it away so he eventually makes a selection
that comes out there's a famous story of a zen mask that was doing calligraphy and he had a
very smart monk standing beside him who was his assistant and the monk said to each one
is he did it you could do better than that oh no no come now you you know much better than that
this master got more and more furious but the monk had to go out to the benjo to the toilet the
monk and he thought wait what he's the way he did it and the monk came back and looked and he said
a masterpiece so this element of selection you see now what what determines this how do you know
or another example of this there was a tea caddy porcelain tea caddy not porcelain but clay
and when senoric you was having tea ceremony he saw this tea caddy and made no comment on it
and the owner was so disappointed that he smashed it but one of his friends
picked the broken pieces out of the trash can and took them to a mender he said look menders with gold
and he put there for gold cement and put this caddy back together and so it had all over its
surface spidery lines of gold and when Ricky saw that he was just enchanted and it became one
of the most valuable tea caddy in the Japanese collections spidery lines of gold following
just the apparently chance marks of a smash there was a competition at the art institute in the
University of Chicago in which the it was a sculpture class and the competition was that each
student was given a cubic foot of plaster of Paris and they said now do something with it
well the prize was won by a woman who looked at this cube and said it has no character
it doesn't want to be anything so she flung it on the floor and smashed it all up
I mean she made dense in it and banged off the corners and put cracks in it and things then she
looked at it again she said ah now I know what it wants to be and so she followed the grain in
it as it were made by all these cracks and produced this marvelous piece of sculpture you have in
this area a very ingenious sculptor by the name of Donald Horde who is a master following the
grain in wood and actually making the grain the grain seems to suggest to him the muscles and the
flow of the kind of body that he's making well that's the thing so when a master decides whether the
accident came off what he wants is this he wants the thing to be the perfect harmony
of man and nature of order and randomness
now this is a curious thing in the human mind when we play games we get most fascination out of
those games which satisfactorily combine skilled and chance games like bridge poker have a sort of
admirable combination of these two elements and we can go on playing those games again and again
because you don't feel completely at the mercy of chance as you do with dice unless you cheat
and you don't feel completely at the mercy of skill as you do with chess or especially with a
game like three-dimensional chess so there's a sort of optimum middle where order and randomness
go together well that's what this man is looking for he's looking for the optimal combination
you see the things that are artwork like Persian miniatures or the jewelry of Chileini
and Chinese porcelain is too much skill too much order it's like those houses you go into
where you then put an action that tray because everything is so clean and everything is so tidy you
down touch it one prefers a house you see that looks a little lived in it is more genial more comfortable
somehow invites you to sit down and even put your feet on the table whereas on the other extreme
some kind of pad where everything is covered in dirt and filthy clothes that thrown in the corner
and you know people are all paint all over them and so on that's that's the other extreme we don't
want that but that's the curious thing in the middle now the most difficult thing is to hold to the
middle it's like walking a tight rope and that's why the path of Buddhism is called the razor's edge
because you see what happened when this all this kind of work in the course of history became fashionable
people began to affect these styles for example when seshu the great master
bruh in painter worked he would sometimes take a handful of straw and paint with that instead of a brush
in order to get the sort of rough effect that he wanted but later on there came people who could take
an ordinary paint brush and so exactly ink that brush that it would give precisely the messy
effect that they had in mind they would also be able to ink a brush in such a way and this is
terribly decadent they could dab grapes on a vine and have dark ink where the shadow was supposed to be
and knowing to tall were the highlight was supposed to be as when they started getting mixed up with
Western ideas about shadows and perspective they didn't have that earlier but they were so skilled
in the handling of of ink that they would do this sort of thing and they would imitate you see all the
so-called rough natural effects of the rates and artists and so today in Japan a younger generation
of artists has decided it's time to break all that up if we imagine for example high coup parties
the writing of high coup poetry basho who was the great 17th century master of high coup said get a
three-foot child to write high coup because they are the sort of direct dialless things that children would say
but now that a magazine is devoted to high coup poetry where in every issue there will be
10,000 high coups written by people all over the country and they get so stilled and so affected
that one which one had never heard of high coup the same thing is starting over here and you should
see the entries we get in these high coup competitions that Japan airlines and other people sponsor
but it all after a while becomes dated stilled and so somewhere again the new thing has to break out
which is always coming up but there's no formula you see for fixing it so that you could do it again
and again and again because the moment you start doing it again and again and again it isn't it anymore
the the real thing is escaped do you remember sometime ago there was a fashion for having
rod iron fish just the outline of a fish some artists originally you know put this fish together
and look great but then you suddenly found them in every gift shop at dime store and they look
perfectly terrible so this is the mysterious thing well not only in the arts but in life styles
in everything when you start saying what is the technique for getting this thing and people say
well this is it it's gone same in education same in music the moment you start teaching
something what are you what question you ask him how could we is this some method whereby in our
schools we could produce from the music department every graduation ceremony three music musicians
of the statue of Bach or Mozart now if we knew how to do that that knowledge would prevent us
from being surprised by the work of these people because we would know how it's done
and when you know how something is done it doesn't surprise you that's why there's a Zen poem
which says if you ask where the flowers come from even the god of spring doesn't know
suddenly the god of spring would be supposed to know where the flowers come from and the truth
of the matter is he doesn't and so in the same way if you ask the Lord God how do you create the
universe he said I have no special method and this is known in Zen it's a very difficult this is the
most difficult virtue to attain and so many of these things begin with mull
dhuji dhuji it means nothing special it means no business no artificiality in American current
real cool so bhuji is where something doesn't stand out like a sore thumb but it is absolutely
different from being modest a bhuji person may be modest in the sense that if he knows he can
do something well he just says he can he doesn't go at all sorts of
that blushing violet techniques bhuji you see is this mysterious quality
of nothing special no special method because if there is let me repeat if we do know the method
it means no it infallibly it ceases to be interesting there are no surprises left
and the moment the element of surprise has gone the possessed of light has gone that you see is
why it's very difficult to teach Zen to yourself because you can't easily surprise yourself
the essence you see of this kind of spontaneity is response to a surprise so the master you
don't know what he's going to do and he surprises you so I trying to cure hiccups very difficult
to cure yourself because when you patch yourself on the back you know when you're going to do it
so you're already for it when somebody else comes up and slams you on the back and that's a surprise
and what you needed was a surprise or it's like jokes what makes you laugh about a joke is the
element of surprise in it that's why jokes aren't funny after they've been explained so in the same
way all these Zen stories if explained have no effect they're intended to produce what I would
call metaphysical laughter but this has to be a surprise and so as to be surprised
well it does no way of premeditating it so you see if you read for example there's a book out here
called Zen by Oyergen Herrigal who started archery many of you probably read this book
he had to learn to pull the bow string in the manner of the Japanese archer and let it go
but not on purpose he's had to let it go without thinking first I'll let it go
and then let go he had to let it go not on purpose now that really bugged herrigal how do you do something
not on purpose especially if you're aiming at a target well the whole point is if you think
before you shoot it's too late the target's moved that's why we have a thing like beginners luck
you see if you simply pointed something like that if your finger was a gun I would probably have hit
the light switch and so you get a person who's naive about a gun will pick a gun up and bang
and the thing will be put drop dead I don't ever forget the first time I ever used a slingshot
yes friend of mine was with me and he was aiming away and not missing I just picked it up
ping on it hit but I couldn't do it again you get a certain naturalness there
so there was a master by the name of EQ who was a great leg puller and he had in front of his
house a very null pine tree one of those things that I thought it and they loved this kind of thing
and he put a notice up I said I EQ will pay 100 yen which was a fair amount of money in those days
to anyone who can see this tree straight well soon there was a whole crowd of people around that tree
lying on the ground twisting their necks and looking at it from all sorts of angles
and it was absolutely no way of seeing the tree with a straight trunk but EQ had a friend it was
a priest of another sect and a smart boy went over to see this friend and said what about this
Mr. EQ's tree Oxford the Alps is perfectly simple he said you go and tell him the answer to
seeing the tree straight is the look straight at it so this man went over to EQ and said I claim the
reward he said you look straight at it and EQ looked him in a funny way and he said he before
to the hundred year and gave it to him I think you've been talking to Rosen down the street
now in that way you see just look straight at it in other words here's the bow string
I'd go of it don't it all this fimble fambling mimble mambling jumble humble about
the right technique of letting go of it let go of it dammit but that's very difficult
this is if why was say to you now everybody let's be unself conscious
and so finally in desperation you at last learn to let go of the thing
which was what she was supposed to do all the time
and then one is as again as a child this is original innocence
so this is the meaning of the person who was asked what do you do here in the Zen
institution he said we eat when hungry and we sleep when tired
well he said that's being just like everybody else they all do that he said they do not
when they eat they don't eat but they think of all sorts of extraneous matters
and they tire they don't sleep they dream all kinds of dreams
so let's have an intermission
