Now, I want to go today into the subject of the male female symbolism in tantric yoga.
You will find that in the tantric art forms that every Buddha or aspect of the Buddha has
a feminine counterpart.
And that not only do they have feminine counterparts, but they also have various levels
on which they are represented.
In other words, we started out, remember, I described in the last seminar, there were
the idea of five so-called Yani Buddhas, and these five who represent as it were
the center of a rose, one's in the middle and four's around.
Then each one has a corresponding bodhisattva form, and then each bodhisattva has in turn
a corresponding heruka form, but there are all forms of the original five.
Then whether they are in the form of a Yani Buddha or in the form of a bodhisattva or in
the form of a heruka which is kind of wrathful and weird, far out to kind of character
often with bull's heads.
This one here, which we can look at as a little statue that Kim was brought over.
They are all reducible to the original group.
And all have these female counterparts and they are represented as in sexual intercourse,
touching at all points in a complete embrace.
And the idea is that this embrace lasts forever and ever and ever and never and never ends,
because this is a way of representing the nature of life.
What is fundamentally involved in this system is self-knowledge.
You see, it without resonance, nothing happens.
If there are no echoes, you can't hear anything.
Using we get a room in which we blanket all the walls and blanket the floor, sound
proof it in every possible direction, you can hardly hear anyone talk.
Because voice requires resonance.
That's why people enjoy singing in the bathtub.
They suddenly discover, they've got a good voice because suddenly the bath on the structure
of the room is all non-sound proofed.
Resonates their voice.
That's why you use a violin or a cello or a bass fiddle has a big wooden structure
to make the sound resonant to play back to itself.
And that's why we are all so fascinated with recording things, taking photographs, writing
them down and about all remembering it's a form of resonance.
Because you see, if you don't remember anything, you don't know you're there.
A person who had total amnesia and lived in a split second only, wouldn't know he was there.
We could conceive and perhaps there are some forms of life that don't know that I don't
know whether my in particular cells constituting my body.
I don't know whether they know they're there.
Maybe they do.
Maybe they have some wonderful system of resonance that I know nothing about.
And they're all worried about what I'm going to do with them.
Having conferences and meetings and policy decisions and so on and so forth, because this
person in charge, you know, it might well be that when I die,
when we all die, all our cells suddenly say God is dead and they have the big theological
controversy and say, well, we just have to fend for ourselves from now on and that's
called corruption and they all go off on their own.
So I don't know, it may be that we've got some kind of a system like that, but certainly
to know that you're there, you need an echo.
So I invented this lemuric, there was a young man who said, though, it seems that I know
that I know what I would like to see is the eye that knows me when I know that I know
that I know.
So this is the thing, you see, not only do you remember what happened and say it made
an impression on me, which means it made me remember, like your retina, remembers whatever
is seen so that it sticks there a little.
In other words, that's why you get the illusion of a circle of fire when you revolve
a cigarette in the dark.
It makes the impression of a circle because your retina remembers and holds as it were the
impression of the flame and so then beyond that we are absolutely fascinated with
the whole principle of remembering and so then when there's some gathering of people and
we say, well, this is a great day, what a wonderful picnic or whatever it is we're having,
it's pity somebody didn't bring a camera.
It should have been photographed.
Now, do you see that in this whole thing there is both a gain and a loss?
One school of people are saying it should be photographed.
The other school of people are saying, let go of it.
When you go around we had so much experience of this in Japan because all our students
brought cameras and were constantly photographing things and I had a camera and I was constantly
photographing things but I felt that as so long as I had a camera with me, I was somehow
distracted from actuality.
I had little box with which I went around grabbing life.
Because it's great to come back and look at it in the form of photographs but there's something
about the photograph that is inferior to the actual experience that you're photographing.
But there is an immense fascination in photography, in painting, in reproducing and reproducing
you see is the same thing as sexuality, it is reproduction only in another way.
Because it tells you you're there, you're alive, the thing bounces, it echoes.
So the duplicity in all this is you see one school of religious people say, let it all go,
don't be attached.
In other words and they also say live in the moment like Krishna Murat is doctrine of stop
try to remember everything.
You may need a kind of factual memory for your name and address and a telephone number
and things like that.
But don't linger over memories and treasure memories and say, well I'm going to keep my girlfriend's
lock of hair and I'll take it out every now and then and look at it and feel wonderful
you see.
That's clinging to life because that memory has got you hooked, it holds you to the past
and it holds you to death.
But then there's the other school of thought, you see, quite opposite to this which says,
remember to remember, title of one of Henry Miller's books, hold on to it all, get involved,
keep your girlfriends here, keep all the photographs, you know, in some houses the piano,
everything is completely covered with photographs and reminiscences.
I went to visit Gloria's Quanson once and I've never seen such a house full of memories.
Everything in all directions was Gloria's once photographed on this occasion signed on that
occasion, presentation this, I went to visit once to the wife of a former Archbishop
of Canterbury and the whole house was memorials, I mean it there's a complete clutter of
tombstone furniture with little brass plates on it, presented on the occasion of it's
there and the other, while you say, look, that person isn't really living and they're
all in the past but on the other hand, what is life, you see, except there is a memory,
except there is an echo.
So what I want to point out is the duplicity of all this, that you don't take if you're
a wise man, you don't take sides in this issue.
You do both sides and that is the meaning of the unity of sanghsara and Nirvana.
On the one hand, you let go of everything and you live in the eternal now because that's
all there is, see, memory is an illusion, it's all gone, so everything you know about
that makes an impression on you, it was no longer there, that's the meaning of Maya,
there is only the eternal now, there is only the present moment, never will be anything else.
Because even what you're remembering is happening in the present, the memory is in the
eternal now, isn't it?
See?
So it's all really, absolutely here, but on the other hand, what fun to drag it out and to make
it echo and to get involved and to fall in love and to become attached.
Once our age blithe wrote and said to me, I may have told some of you the story before,
wrote me a letter and said, what are you doing these days?
As for me, I am abandoning all kinds of satory and enlightenment and I'm trying to become
as deeply attached to as many people and as many things as possible.
As these are the two sides, see?
So the thing is this, it's just like riding a bicycle.
It's a balanced trick.
You suddenly find yourself falling over one way, when you balance that, you turn into that
direction and you stay up.
And so in the same way, when you find yourself becoming too attached to life, you correct
that with the realization, but there is nothing except the eternal now.
Then when you feel that's all right now, you see, you're safe again, this is the only
thing they've done now.
Once more, you're going to get attached or you get involved, you get concerned about some
enterprise, social, political, amorous, familial, scholarly, artistic, whatever it is, you
get involved.
And the two always go together, so this is the meaning of this symbolism, because the
male only knows he's there, if there's a female, that's the echo, and she only knows
she's there, if there's a male.
Nobody ever came into existence without a couple of parents, see?
And there's simply no other way into this universe.
Now this is simply, I'm using this simply, not as the main point, but as this sort of
illustration of the simultaneous tenacity of attachment, detachment, in-volution and
evolution, in-volution is how you get involved, in-volution is how you get out, well now.
This tantric yoga represents all this in a most extraordinary symbolism, which is basically
the human body, again, it's not simply the sexual functioning of the human body, it's
the whole nervous system.
If you really dig into this, you will find that there is a psychic anatomy, and this psychic
anatomy in yoga philosophy, belongs to what I explained yesterday as the subtle
body.
You must not expect to find this in the physical organism.
No, must you expect to find that there is in addition to the physical organism, a sort
of spook, that goes round with us.
The physical body is the body as examined by others.
The subtle body is the way you feel yourself.
Now, there is a then, an anatomy of the subtle body, which consists of the processive
in-volution and evolution.
There is a spinal tree, and it's represented as having two power of the stomach.
It is represented as a canal called the Sushumna, and then in this canal there are two
routes, one is called the Eda, and the other is called the pingala, P-I-N-G-L-A, and
the idea Eda.
And on one current, something is going down, and on the other, something is coming up,
and you will recognize, I think, the familiar image of two serpents on a rod, the caducius,
carried by mercury.
And alchemicals, the mercury, the mirror substance, is the void, is the pure, clear light,
the same thing as the Buddhist damned.
Now, down at the base of the spinal column, according to the chakra system, there is what
is called the Kundalini, which is the serpent power, and the symbol of the serpent power
is an inverted triangle, with a phallus upright and erect, and a sleeping serpent coiled
all the way around the phallus.
That is, in other words, in evolution, to be absolutely involved.
And the sex symbol is used again because sex stands for symbolically complete involvement.
Now, when you've got in, the trick is to get out.
So then, the process of yoga is represented as waking up that sleeping serpent, who is under
the sleep of my eye, who is captivated by illusion, and thinks that the world really exists.
In other words, the female echo of himself, or the male echo of herself, has captivated you.
The theory has caught you, and you think it's all really there, and you don't realize
this is the only the eternal now.
And you need to know that, in order not to get quite lost, because if you go out to any
one end of the spectrum, you forget you're there.
As sort of a non-existence, you can't really non-exist, you'll always come back eventually.
And if you get one extreme too much, you don't know you're there.
So then, the symbol is that you draw up the energy located in the Kundalini, which is
the sex center, and you send it back up the spinal tree to the top again, from which it
came.
Now, this is the theory of sex yoga.
The theory is that the male and the female partners, who is I explained yesterday, are husband
and wife, or some kind of spiritual marriage.
What they do is this, by the male sits in the normal meditation posture, and the female
sits on top of him, wrapping her legs round his waist, and her arms round his neck, and
he holds her round the waist.
And in this position, they arouse the sexual force.
Now the theory goes on to say this, that instead of dissipating this energy, in the ordinary
way, having aroused it, they send it up the spinal tree back into the brain.
Now, don't take this literally, this is a symbolism, it's just the same kind of superstitions
thinking that heaven is somewhere up in the sky, and that there really are streets of
gold, and angels wandering around in nightes with arms.
All this is a way of talking about inner, inner, anatomy, psychic anatomy, the kingdom
of heaven is within you, and when Jesus ascended into heaven, He went right into the
middle of himself, and disappeared.
Like the gates of heaven, they're pearls.
People think the pearly gates of gates covered in pearls, there's nothing of the kind.
The gates of heaven are pearls.
Each one is one pearl, and you know a pearl has a very thin hole through it for the thread
to go in, and that's why it's a camel can't go through the eye of a needle, because
you have to become no one to get through that hole.
That's why the idea of many incarnations is likened to beads, strong together on a thread,
and this thread is called the sutra at man, sutra is a thread, at man, the self, the
threading self that hangs all the beads together, but it's so thin, you see, that it's
like nobody, the real you, you have to divest yourself of all hang-ups, you see, to discover
the real you.
Well, we're back again to the thing of pulling the snake up the tree, the serpent power up,
you have to let go of the hang-ups, and realize that there are no possessions, everything's
falling away, all your memories are holding on to illusions.
And then when you thoroughly understand that, you can go back in.
So you've got a marvelous picture of the world as a sort of sister and diastore of attachment
and detachment and detachment and detachment, and this takes us right back, you see, the
Bodhisattva who is liberated, who has let go, and is no longer attached, who are given
up memory, and this is the meaning of giving up woman, who is your resonator, give that
up, see, and you find your free, there's only the eternal now.
So the Bodhisattva, instead of staying there, goes back in, and there are all sorts of funny
symbolic stories about Bodhisattva's appearing in the world as halls, and all kinds
of using every conceivable kind of device in order to liberate other beings.
But this takes us completely back to see to the original Hindu image of the world as the
Pralaya and the Manvantra.
The Manvantra is the period in which Brahma manifests himself as multiple beings for 4, 320,000
years, and the Pralaya is the period in which he withdraws, and everything disappears.
And then starts all over again, and this goes on forever and ever and ever.
In not only our kind of time, but in many other kinds of time, and in all sorts of different
kinds of spaces.
But it's the same fundamental myth, recreated in another form.
You may say, this is pretty monotonous.
And that is, you'll see one of the basic feelings, underlying Buddhism, must we go around
again?
Let's see.
So, indeed, you see, you say, oh, enough of this.
Let's go to sleep.
Let's stop.
Time must have a stop, and so you stop.
Well, when you do that, you forget that it ever happened, you see?
This is a marvelous arrangement, because then it can start all over again, without
you're knowing that it happened before.
So you're never bored, and this is a cure for being tired of it.
Because if you didn't know, I mean, that's where the memory goes, you see.
And so when you come back, there's no problem.
There's no problem of boredom of remembering the past, there's going to be all sorts
of new problems, but you won't know you've had any problems before, so that won't
worry you.
Until you begin to accumulate memories again, and you've had these problems, and it's
coming aboard dealing with problems, and then you'll get rid of yourself.
It's called death.
It's a beautiful arrangement for keeping everything young and new, and for keeping the universe
running without getting tired of itself.
And that's the definition of keeping on.
So you see these are the two motions that fundamentally then represented by the male
and the female, the in and the out, the now moment, and the memory, see memory, and remember
creates the future as well as the past.
You wouldn't know you were going to have anything happen tomorrow, unless something
didn't happen yesterday.
You figure because the sun rose yesterday, and yesterday, and yesterday, and yesterday, the
day that it will arise again tomorrow.
If you didn't remember it, you wouldn't know there was going to be any tomorrow.
Because there isn't tomorrow is an illusion, so it's yesterday.
Simply isn't here.
Where is it?
Bring me tomorrow's newspaper.
Now, this is perfectly marvelous arrangement, you see.
So that you may feel, as you think these things over, that you are almost on the verge
of going mad.
I sometimes feel that when I get involved in the sort of contemplative state, it is so weird
and so far out that I think I'm going to lose my mind.
But don't worry, you see, just like being dead, just like let go, and swing with it.
Because it'll always bounce.
And what makes you give you the sense of going mad is that you think you're not in control,
and that it's all lost, and someone else is going to take over, or something else is
going to take over.
Well of course, it has to, because like you say, when you've driven long enough in
the car, you say to your wife, will you drive for a while, please?
You won't relieve, or something else has to take over, but it's all you.
So do you see that the nature of being is constructed in this extraordinary, fascinating
way?
Know that it constantly renews itself, and therefore is worth going on by eternal forgetting
and getting rid of itself.
