I want to start by re-emphasizing with point that what I call the religions of the East and
the ones we're discussing, Hinduism, Buddhism and Chinese Taoism, they don't involve that
you believe in anything specific and they don't involve any idea of obedience to commandments
from above and they don't involve any conformity to a specific ritual, although they do
have rituals, but their rituals vary from country to country and from time to time.
Their objective is always not ideas, not doctrines, but a method, a method for the transformation
of consciousness.
That is to say, for a transformation of your sensation of who you are and I emphasize the
word sensation because it's the strongest word we have for feeling directly.
When you put your hand on the corner of a table, you have a very definite feeling and when
you are aware of existing, you also have a definite feeling, but in the view of these methods
or disciplines, the ordinary persons definite feeling of the way he exists and who he is
is a hallucination.
To feel yourself as a separate ego, a source of action and awareness that is entirely
separate and independent from the rest of the world, somehow locked up inside a bag of
skin is seen as a hallucination.
That you are not a stranger in the earth that comes into this world either as a result of
a natural fluke or being a sort of spirit that comes from somewhere else altogether.
But that you in your fundamental existence, you are the total energy that constitutes
this universe, playing that it's you, playing that it's this particular organism and
even playing that it's this particular person because the fundamental game of the world is
a game of hide and seek.
That is to say that the colossal reality, the energy that is everything, that is a unitary
energy that is one plays that being many, at manifesting itself in all these particulars
that we call you and you and you and you and you and you and you and you and you and this
and that and all around us and it's fundamentally a game.
And you can say that this goes really for all the systems that I'm talking about.
It's the basis of Hinduism, of Buddhism and of Taoism, this intuition.
Now today we're going to talk about Buddhism.
Buddhism is an offshoot of Hinduism.
You could in a way call it a reform of Hinduism or Hinduism stripped for export.
It originates in Northern India close to the area that is now Nepal shortly after 600 BC.
It was a young prince by the name of Gautama Siddata who became the man we call the Buddha.
Now the word Buddha is not a proper name, it's a title and it's based on the Sanskrit
root Buddha, B.U.D.H., which means to be awake.
And so you could say the Buddha is the man who woke up from the dream of life as we ordinarily
take it to be and found out who he was, who he is.
It's curious that this title was not something new.
There was already in the whole complex of Hinduism, the idea of Buddhas of awakened people.
And curiously they are ranked higher than gods, because in the view of Hinduism, even the gods
or the angel of the Davers are still bound on the wheel of the sort of squirrel cage of going
round and round and round in the pursuit of success.
And the idea is that if you pursue something that you can call success, pleasure, good,
virtue, which originally of course means strength, magical power, all these positive things.
You are under illusion, because the positive cannot exist without the negative.
To be, you only know what to be is by contrast with not to be, so if we say now there is a coin in the left hand,
there is no coin in the right. And from this you get the idea of to be and not to be.
And you can't have the one without the other. So if you try to pursue to gain the positive
and to deny, get rid of the negative, it's as if you were trying to arrange everything in this room
so that it was all up and nothing was done. You can't do it. You set yourself an absolutely
insoluble problem, because the basis of life is spectrum. I'll consider the spectrum of colors.
When you think of a spectrum, in what form do you think of it? Most people think of it as a ribbon
with red at one end and purple at the other. But the spectrum is actually a circle.
Because purple is the mixture of red and blue. It goes right round. And so in this way,
all sensation, all feeling, all experience whatsoever, is moving through spectra.
You don't only have the spectrum of color, you have a spectrum of sound,
you have various complex spectra of texture, of smell, of taste. And you're constantly
operating through all the possible variations of experience. And it implies that you can't
know one end of the spectrum without also knowing the other. So if you wanted to say your favorite
color is red and you wanted only red and you had to exclude therefore blue and purple.
Without blue and purple, you can't have red. The kind of course, all the various colors in the
spectrum is the white light. And behind everything that we experience, all our various sensations
of sound, of color, of shape, of touch, there's the white light. And I'm using the phrase,
the white light. Rather symbolically, I don't mean it literally. But there is common to all
sensations, what you might call the basic sense. And if you explore back into your sensations
and reduce them all to the basic sense, you're on your way to reality, to what underlies everything,
to what is the ground of being the basic energy. And to the extent that you realize this
and know that you are it, you transcend, you overcome, you surpass the illusion that you are simply
John Doe, Mary Smith or what have you. So then the Buddha, as the man who woke up,
is regarded as one Buddha among a potentiality of millions of Buddhas. Everybody can be a Buddha.
Everybody has in himself the capacity to wake up from the illusion of being simply this
separate individual. The Buddha made his doctrine very easy to understand, because in those days there
wasn't very much writing being done, and people committed things to memory. And so he put
his doctrine or method in various formulae, which are very easy to remember, and I'm going to explain
it in those terms so that you can remember it just as well. He, of course, practiced the various
disciplines that were offered in the Hinduism of his time. But he found in a certain way that
they had become unsatisfactory, because they had overemphasized asceticism. Had overemphasized,
putting up with as much pain as you can. There was a feeling you see that if the problem of life is pain,
let us suffer. And this is the root of the ascetics who lie on beds of nails, who hold a hand up,
forever and ever and ever, who eat only one banana a day, who renounce sex, who do all these weird
things, because they feel that if they head right into pain and don't become afraid of it,
but suffer as much pain as possible, they will by this method overcome the problem of pain.
And they will set themselves free from anxiety. There's a certain sense in that as you could
obviously see. Supposing, for example, you have absolutely no fear of pain. You have no
anxiety as you have no hangups. How strong you would be. Nobody could stop you.
You would have ultimate courage. But the Buddha was very subtle. He is really the first
historical psychologist, the great psychologist, psychotherapist. He is very subtle,
because he saw that a person who is fighting pain, who is trying to get rid of pain,
is still really fundamentally afraid of it. And therefore, the way of asceticism
is not right. Equally, the way of hedonism, of seeking pleasure is not right.
So the Buddha's doctrine is called the middle way, which is neither ascetic nor hedonistic.
So it's summed up in what I call the four noble truths.
And the first is called Duka. Duka means suffering in a very generalized sense.
You could call it chronic frustration. And it is saying that life as lived by most people is Duka.
Is an attempt, in other words, to solve insoluble problems. Try to draw a square circle.
You can't, because the problem itself is meaningless. Try to arrange the things in this room
so that they're all up and none of them down. It is meaningless. Such a problem cannot ever be solved.
So try to have light without dark or dark without light. It can never be solved.
So the attempt to solve problems that are basically insoluble and to work at it through your whole life.
That is Duka. Now, he went on to analyze this that there are what he called three signs of being.
The first is Duka itself. Frustration. The second is Anitya.
And this means the letter A in Sanskrit at the beginning of a word is often the equivalent of our
non. So Nithya means permanent. Anitya means impermanent. That every manifestation of life is impermanent.
And therefore our quest to make things permanent, to straighten everything out, to get it fixed,
is an impossible and insoluble problem. And therefore we experience Duka or this sense of fundamental pain and frustration
as a result of trying to make things permanent. And the third sign of being is called Anitman.
Now, you know from my talk on Hinduism that the word Atman means self. Anatman means therefore non-self.
That there is in you no real ego. Now, I've explained that already. I've explained in talking about Hinduism
that the idea of the ego is a social institution. It has no physical reality.
It is simply the ego is your symbol of yourself just as the word water is a noise which symbolizes
a certain liquid reality. So the idea of the ego, the role you play, who you are, is not the same
as your living organism. Your ego has absolutely nothing to do with the way you color your eyes.
Shape your body. Circulate your blood. That's the real you.
But it's certainly not your ego because you don't even know how it's done from the standpoint of
your conscious attention. So the idea of Anatman is firstly that the ego is unreal, the
reason one. Now then this then is the first truth. There is this situation that we have
Dukha or frustration because we are fighting the changingness of things and because we don't
realize that the ego, the eye, is unreal. The second of the four noble truths is then called
Trishna. Trishna is a Sanskrit word again and is the root of our word first
and it's usually translated desire but it is better translated, clinging, grabbing or
there's an excellent modern American slangy word, hang up. That is exactly what Trishna is,
a hang up. Trishna is clutching as for example what we call smother love. When a mother is so afraid
that her children may get into trouble that she protects them excessively and as a result of this
prevents them from growing or when a when lovers cling to each other excessively and have to
sign documents that they will curse and swear to love each other always. They are in a state of
Trishna and this is the same thing as holding onto yourself so tightly that you strangled yourself.
Now the second truth then about Trishna is that the cause of Dukha is Trishna.
Klinging is what makes suffering. If you don't recognize that this whole world is a phantasmagoria
and an amazing illusion, a weaving of smoke and you try to hold onto it, you see, then you start
suffering. Seriously suffering. Trishna is in turn based upon a video.
The same negative are video from the root vid, means knowledge as in the Latin vidio and the English
vision. Avidya therefore is ignorance. Genosis, gna means of course to know.
Canalage is the same thing as genosis in Greek. To know, so this is not to know, to ignore,
to overlook and I explained in the first talk in this series how we ignore all kinds of things,
because we notice only what we think noteworthy and therefore our vision of everything is highly selective.
We pick out certain things and say that's what's there. Just as we select and notice
the figure rather than the background, sometimes I draw this on the blackboard.
Now ask the question, what have I drawn? What would you say? What have I drawn?
The circle, any other suggestions? Yeah, you're getting the point. I've drawn a wall with a
hole in it. You see? But ordinarily you've been reading my books. But ordinarily people see
the ball, the circle, the ring or whatever and never think of the background because they ignore
the background. Just as one thinks that you can have pleasure without pain. You want pleasure
of the figure and don't realize that pain is the background. So Avidya is the state of restricted
consciousness, restricted attention that moves through life unaware of the fact that to be implies
is not to be and vice versa. So now the third noble truth is called Nirvana.
This word means blow out. Nirna is a negative word again, like a vana is blowing. So it's a kind of
outblowing. Now in breathing you know that breath is life. The Greek word, you may pronounce it
pnaima or pnefma is the same as spirit and spirit means breath in the book of Genesis
when God had made the clay figurine that was later to be Adam. He breathed the breath of life into
its nostrils and it became alive because life is breath. But now if you hold your breath you lose it.
He that would save his life will lose it. So breathe in, breathe in, breathe in, get as much
air as you can and trishna clean and you lose it. So Nirvana means breath out.
What a relief that was. The sigh of relief. Let it go.
Because it'll come back to you if you let it go. But if you don't let it go you'll just suffocate.
So a person in the state of Nirvana is what we might call a blown out person like blow your mind.
That go. Don't clean and then you're in the state of Nirvana and I re-emphasize the point.
This is not preaching. See? Not saying this is what you ought to do. I'm simply pointing out
a state of affairs that is so. There's no moralism in this whatsoever. It's simply pointing out like
if you put your hand into the fire you'll get burned. You couldn't get burned if you wanted.
It's okay. But if you so happens that you don't want to get burned and you don't put your hand
in the fire. So in the same way if you don't want to be in a state of anxiety all the time.
And again I emphasize if you like to be anxious it's perfectly all right. If that's see
Buddhism never hurries anyone on. They say you've got all eternity through which to live in various
forms. And therefore you don't have just one life in which you've got to avoid eternal
damnation. You can go running around the wheel and the rat race and play that game just as long
as you want to so long as you think it's fun. But if the comes a time when you don't think it's fun
you don't have to do it. So I wouldn't say to anyone who disagrees with me and who says well
I think we ought to engage the forces of evil in battle and put this world to right and so on and so forth
and arrange everything in this world so that it's all up. Try it please. It's perfectly okay.
Go on doing that. But if you see that it's futile then you can let go.
Don't try to cling, relax. And if you do that you're in the state of Nirvana
and you become a Buddha. And of course it means that you become a rather astonishing person.
You may of course be subtle about it and make like you a very ordinary person
so that you don't get people mixed up. And so in Buddhism the Buddha explained that his doctrine,
his method, was a raft. It's sometimes called a Yana, the word Y-A-N-A Yana, means a vehicle
a conveyance. And when you cross a river on a raft and you get to the other shore you don't pick
up the raft and carry it on your back. You leave it behind. But people who are what I would call
hooked on religion are always on the raft. They're going back and forth, back and forth, back and
forth on the raft. So the clergyman tends to turn into a ferryman who's always on the raft and never
gets over to the other shore himself. Now something to be said for that because how if we're going
to get the raft back to the first shore to bring over the other people? See, somebody has to volunteer
to take the back journey. But he must be awfully careful to realize that the real objective is to
get the people across and set them free. If you dedicate yourself to ferrying people across,
don't ask them to come back on the raft with you because you get overcrowded and people will
think that the raft is the goal rather than the other shore. So when I find this in actual practice
that when clergyman do not ever ask for money, it's all right, you know, like a doctor
who's simply charged as a fee says, you come to me, you pay me so much. But the clergyman says,
he doesn't say, pay me so much. He says, we would like your pledge, your voluntary contribution.
See, and then nobody knows what to give. That's the idea of the raft. Now then the fourth noble
truth is called Maraga. This word means path and the way of Buddhism is often called the
noble eightfold path because there are eight phases. I won't say steps because they're not
sequential. The sumyak is a very curious phrase. Doesn't mean right in our sense of correct.
Sum is the same really as our word sum, total, complete, all inclusive. We might say we might use
the word integrated as when we say a person has integrity. The person who has integrity we mean
he's all of a piece. He's not divided against himself. So in this sense of sumyak, dirsthi,
this is related to the word darashan, which means a point of view of viewing. When you go to visit
a great guru or teacher, you have darashan, you look at him. And you offer your reverence to
this darashan. Many senses of it, but it means simply to view. Look at the view. So the sumyak
darashan is the complete view. For example, let's take the constellation called the big dipper.
We look at it from a fairly restricted zone in space and it always seems whatever the season
of the year, because we're so far away from it, that those stars in the big dipper are in the same
position. But imagine looking at it from somewhere else in space altogether and those stars
would not look like a dipper. There'd be in another position. Now then what is the true position
of those stars? Don't you see there isn't one? Because wherever you look for position altars,
you could say that the true situation of those stars is how they are looked at from all points
of view, all possible points of view. Inside the constellation, looking outwards, outside the
constellation, looking inwards from everywhere and everywhere. But you see there is no such thing
as the truth. The world, in other words, is not existing independently of those who witness it.
Because the world is precisely the relationship between the world and its witnesses.
And so if there are no eyes in this world, the sun doesn't make any light, nor do the stars.
So what is a relationship? You can, for example, prop up two sticks by leaning them against each other
and they will stand. But only by depending on each other, take one away and the other falls.
So in Buddhism, it is taught that everything in this universe depends on everything else.
That we have a kind of a huge network. And this is called the doctrine of mutual interdependence.
All of it hangs on you, and you hang on all of it. Just as the two sticks support each other.
And this is conveyed in a symbol which is called Indra's net. Imagine a multidimensional spider's web.
In the early morning, covered with dew drops. And every dew drop contains the reflection of all the other dew drops.
And in each reflected dew drop, the reflections of all the other dew drops in that reflection. And so at infinite.
That is the Buddhist conception of the universe, in an image. The Japanese call that G. G. Mulge, a G.
Means a thing event, a happening. So between happening and happening,
mu, there is no gear separation. G. G. Mulge.
Now, so the first phase of the eightfold path has to do with one's view, understanding of the world.
The second phase has to do with action, how you act. Buddhist idea of ethics is based on
expediency. If you are engaged in the way of liberation, and you want to clarify your consciousness,
doing that is inconsistent with certain kinds of action. So every Buddhist makes five vows, five precepts.
And you may perhaps have heard the Buddhist formula of taking what is called Panchasila, the five precepts.
And they take what are called Tisarana, the three refuges, and the five precepts.
The refuges are the Buddha, the Dalama, the doctrine, and the Sangha, the fellowship of all those
who are on the way. So the priest, the Bikhu, the Buddhist monk, and the lay people will chant the formula.
Buddha, the Sangha, the Sangha, the Sangha, the Sangha, the Sangha, the Sangha, the Sangha.
Those are the three refuges, the Buddha, the Dalama, and the Sangha. Then they take the five precepts.
So they take these five precepts.
I undertake the precept to abstain from taking life. Adina Dana, I undertake the precept to abstain from taking what is not given.
I undertake the precept to abstain from exploiting the passions.
Nusavada, I undertake the precept to abstain from falsifying speech.
Surah-Maria Majapamadatana, I undertake the precept to abstain from being intoxicated by Surah-Maria and Majapamadatana.
Whatever they were.
I presume Tadi, which is alcohol, I don't know what else it was, nobody does now.
Because you see, if you start killing people or taking life, you're in trouble.
You set up an opposition and you've got to become involved in taking care of it.
If you start stealing, you worry people. You upset people's orientation in life.
Because if you suddenly come into the back home for dinner and find somebody's stolen your table, where you're going to serve dinner.
If you exploit your passions, it means that when you feel bored and somehow that life is a little bit empty,
you say, well, now what are we going to do this evening? Let's go and get stuffed.
A lot of people who suffer from obesity are trying to simply fill their empty psyche by stuffing themselves with food.
What's the wrong cure?
So likewise, Musavada, if you start telling lies to everybody, you know what happens when you start telling lies.
You have to tell extra lies to cover up the first one and you get into the most hopeless misunderstanding.
Speech collapses.
And of course, the intoxication is the same problem as the exploitation of the passions.
So there's a purely kind of practical, expedient, utilitarian approach to morals.
There's another side to this, which doesn't end to the presets, which I will explain later.
So that's the third phase of the eightfold path.
And now the second phase, then the third phase has to do with your mind, with your state of consciousness.
And this has to do with what we would ordinarily call meditation.
But the two final, the seventh and eighth aspects of the path are called samyak shmriti.
And samyak samadhi.
Shmriti means recollection.
That's the best English word for it.
Now do you understand the word recollect is to gather together what has been scattered?
What is the opposite of remember?
Obviously dismember.
What has been chopped up and scattered becomes remembered.
So in the Christian scheme, do this in remembrance of me.
You see, the Christ has been sacrificed.
Chopped up.
But the mass is celebrated in remembrance.
One of the old litages says the wheat, which has been scattered all over the hills,
and grows up is gathered again into the bread.
Remember, go back to your Hindu bases.
The world is regarded as the dismemberment of the self, the Brahman, for Godhead.
The one is dismembered into the many.
So remembrance is realizing again that each single member of the many is really the one.
So that's recollection.
You can think of it too in another way, and it's really the same way if you think it through.
I'm going to leave you with a few puzzles so that you can think them through and I won't explain them.
But another way is to be recollected is to be completely here and now.
Are you here and now? Are you really here?
There was a wise old boy who used to give lectures on these things, and he would get up and not say a word.
He would just look at the audience.
He had examined every person individually, and they'd all start feeling uncomfortable.
He wouldn't say anything, he'd look at them all.
And then he'd suddenly say, wake up!
You're all asleep!
And if you don't wake up, I won't give you any lecture.
Are you here, recollected?
See most people aren't.
They're bothering about yesterday and wondering what they're going to do tomorrow.
And aren't all here, that's a definition of sanity to be all there.
So to be recollected, is to be completely alert, available for the present.
Because that's the only place that you are ever going to be in.
Yes, did it doesn't exist? Tomorrow never comes. There is only today.
A great Sanskrit sort of invocation says, look to this day for it is life.
In its brief course, lie all the realities of our existence.
Yesterday is but a memory.
Tomorrow is only a vision.
Look well then to this day, such as the salutation of the dawn.
So the shmiti means then recollect it is in the sense of being all here.
In the sense that this is the only where there is.
Then beyond that comes samadhi.
Again, notice the presence of this word, s-a-m, sam.
Samadhi is integrated consciousness in which there is no further separation between the
power and the known subject in the object.
You are what you know.
Now we think in the ordinary way that we are the witnesses of a constantly changing panorama of experience
from which we as the knowers of this in a way stand aside and watch it.
We think of our minds as a kind of tablet upon which experience writes a record.
And the tablet is always there, although the experience goes by.
And eventually the experience by writing so much on the tablet wears it out.
It's all scratched away and you die.
But actually, if you will investigate this and you have to experiment on this because I cannot explain it to you in words,
you can only find it out for yourself.
There is no difference between the knower and the known.
Then you say, I see a sight.
I feel a feeling.
You are using redundant language.
I see implies the sight.
I feel implies the feeling.
Do you hear sounds?
No.
You just hear or you can say there are sounds.
Either one will do.
So you will find if you thoroughly investigate the process of experiencing.
That the experiencing is the same as the experienceer.
And this is the state of Somadi.
I put it originally in this form that the organism and the environment are a single behavioral process.
So likewise is the knower and the known.
So you as someone who is aware and all that you are aware of is one process.
That is the state of Somadi.
And you get to that state by the practice of meditation.
Every Buddha figure practically is seen in the sitting posture of meditation, which is sitting
down quietly.
And being aware of all that goes on without comment, without thinking about it.
And when you stop categorizing, verbalizing, talking to yourself inside your head.
Naturally, the separations between, for example, knower and known self and other simply vanish.
Can you point to the difference between my five fingers?
Where will you put your finger if you want to point to the difference?
You see the idea of difference is an abstraction.
It just isn't there in the physical world.
Of course, that's not saying that the fingers are joined like a duck's claws with a web.
But it's just that. They're not the same. That's an idea. They're not different.
That's an idea.
And these ideas just aren't here.
See? You can't point to it. You can't put your finger on it.
Get them to the state of affairs where you see the world free from concepts.
That's what Buddhists mean by void.
They say the world is basically, they use the phrase shunya.
That has a meaning of like empty void.
Everything is shunya. This has certainly also the meaning of anitya of transients, but basically it means.
You can't catch the world in a conceptual nit.
Just if you try to catch water in a nit, it all slips through.
If you try to tie up water in a paper package or grab it in your hands, it all flows through.
So shunya, it doesn't really mean that the world itself, that the energy of the world is nothing at all.
It means that no concept of it is valid.
You cannot make any one idea or belief or doctrine or system or theory tie the thing up.
So if you go through this and you get completely blown out and released and are in the state of Nirvana,
for no reason that anybody can explain.
Just as for example, as I pointed out, when you see that you can't change yourself.
You can't lift yourself up by your own bootstraps.
You then get a new access of psychic energy.
So an exactly the same way.
When you get to the state of Nirvana, there are wells up from within you,
what the Buddhists call karuna or compassion.
The sense that you aren't different from everybody else.
Everybody else is suffering is your suffering.
And so this tremendous sense of solidarity with all other beings arises.
So that he who reaches Nirvana doesn't as it were with draw into a sort of isolated piece.
But as always coming back into the world, into the difficulties, into the problems of life.
In compassion for everyone else.
You can't be saved alone because you're not alone.
You are the whole cosmos.
