Between Western psychology, psychiatry and psychotherapy, and the so-called religions of
Asia, there is common ground because both are interested in changing states of human consciousness,
whereas institutional Western religion, Christianity, Judaism, and even Islam are relatively
less interested in this matter.
Western religions are more concerned with behavior, doctrine, and belief than with any transformation
of the way in which we are aware of ourselves and of the world.
But this matter concerns psychiatry and psychology very much.
Suddenly, those states of consciousness, which are not normal, are usually treated
in Western psychology as being in some way sick.
There are of course exceptions to this, and there have increasingly been exceptions.
In the work of young, and to some extent, even of gruddic, of trinthome, of more modern
people, Rogers, and Ronald Lang, changing consciousness is often looked upon as a form of therapy.
That in general, different states of consciousness from the normal, are regarded as a form
of sickness, and therefore, official and institutional psychiatry constitutes itself the guardian
of sanity, and of socially approved experience of reality, and very often it seems to
me that reality appears rather much the way the world is seen on a bleet Monday morning.
In this official doctrine, I might even say dogma of what reality is, because after all,
we know that our science, such as it is of psychology, is founded in the scientific naturalism
of the 19th century.
And the metaphysical and mythological assumptions of that science, still underlie a great deal
of psychological thinking in behaviorism, eminently, but also to a large extent in official
psychoanalysis.
Indeed one might say that psychoanalysis is based on Newtonian mechanics, and in fact, could
be called psychohydraulics.
Not that analogy is altogether inappropriate, because there are certainly respects in which
our psychic life flows and exhibits the dynamics of water, but of course we want to know
what kind of water, and for the scientific naturalism of the 19th century, the basic
energies of nature were considered to be very much inferior to human consciousness in quality.
Ernst Hakele, a biologist of that time, would think of the energy of the universe as blind
energy.
But correspondingly it seems to me that Freud thought of the libido as essentially blind
unconscious energy, embodying only a kind of formless, unstructured and insatiable lust.
This is a generalization, some modification in that thinking is of course possible, but
the tendency is to regard all that which lies below the surface of human consciousness as
being less evolved, because you must remember that this was also the time of Darwin's
theories of evolution.
Of seeing the human mind as the fortuitus development from much more primitive forms of life,
coming forth by purely mechanical processes, by natural selection, and by the survival
of the fittest, and therefore man was in general seen as a fluke of nature, an embodiment
of reason, emotion and values, for which the more basic processes of nature had no sympathy
and about which they did not care.
If therefore the human race is to flourish, we must take charge of evolution.
It can no longer be left to spontaneous process, but must be directed by human ingenuity,
despite the fact that although our brains are capable of dealing with a colossal number
of variables at once, our conscious attention is not.
Most people cannot consider more than three variables at the same time without using a pencil.
And this shows that in many ways the scanning process of man's conscious attention
is very inadequate for dealing with the infinitely many variables, the multidimensional processes
of the natural universe.
However, a serious attempt has been made and scientific naturalism issued in a fantastic
fight with nature.
In this whole notion of the conquest and subordination of nature, which has as a matter
of fact very ancient non-scientific and biblical origins, with the idea of man as the
head and chief and ruler of nature in the image of God.
And the time has now dawned upon us all when our attempts to beat nature into submission
are having alarming results, because we see that it is very dangerous to mess around with
processes that we don't understand, that having enormous numbers of variables and we begin
to wonder whether we hadn't better let well enough alone.
At the same time, although I said that Western psychology had more in common or more common
interest with Oriental religion than it does with Western religion, there is a sense in which
psychiatry and psychotherapy are becoming the religion of the West.
Psychoanalysis has much in common with the forms and procedures of institutional religion.
There is, for example, apostolic succession.
The passing down of manner of qualified power to practice therapy from the father found
a Siegman Freud through his immediate apostles to an enormous company of archbishop's
and bishops.
Among whom there are, of course, as the word with Christianity, heresy arcs, such as
young and broad egg and rung and rife, and the heresy arcs are duly excommunicated and
anathematized.
There are rituals, as there are also rituals with religion.
There is the sacrament of the couch.
There is the spiritual discipline of free association.
There is the mystic knowledge of the interpretation of dreams, and there are also the two
great symbolic fetishes, the long one and the round one.
Now it's extraordinarily easy to make fun of all this, and we must not forget that we
owe a tremendous debt to Freud.
If nothing else than pointing out, that much of ourselves of which we are aware in terms
of the conscious ego is not really ourselves, it is something superficial.
However, we define its nature, it is superficial, and the realities of human life are not
under the gaze of its scanning process, at least not in the ordinary way.
And that was a tremendous revelation, there is no question about that.
But one sees troublesome signs when the doctrines and processes of psychiatry, psychoanalysis,
and so forth become officialised.
I think Thomas Sass and his books, the myth of mental illness and the manufacture of madness
is pointing out something extremely important to us, which is that in effect the psychological
official of today is the priest, and that he is beginning to exercise the same sort of
controls over human life as were exercised by the church in the middle ages.
So that a professor of psychiatry at Columbia or Harvard or Yale medical schools has today
the same sort of intellectual respectability and authority as the professor of theology
at the University of Toledo or Padua would have had in the 1400.
Now you must realize that the theologians of those days
not simply believed in their cosmology and the theology, they almost knew it was true in the
same way that our scientists know certain things to be true. Despite the fact that they
changed their opinions very often while they hold them, they have in effect the force of dogma
as witness the anathematization of Velikovsky or his uncomfortable ideas.
And therefore there are herases existing today which are persecuted in the same way as herases
were persecuted by the Holy and Cuisician.
And they are persecuted out of kindness. It exactly the same way that the Holy inquisition
persecuted heresy out of kindness and deep concern for human beings. That is unimaginable to us
but it was so. For after all, if you seriously believed that someone who did not hold the Catholic
and who voluntarily rejected it would be tortured physically and spiritually forever and ever and
ever in hell, you would resort to almost any means to preserve a fellow human being from such a fate.
Especially if the complaint or disease of heresy from which he suffered was infectious.
You would first of all reason with him. And if he was not responsive to reason,
you would resort to abuse and to force for argument. And if he was not responsive to that,
you would give him shock treatment and bang him about. If that didn't work, the thumb screw
and the rack and the iron maiden. And if that didn't work as a last desperate resort,
you would burn him at the stake in the Pious Hope that in the midst of those searing fires he would
think better and make a last act of perfect contrition. And so be rescued from everlasting
damnation. And you did all this. We're in the spirit of this is going to hurt me more than it's
going to hurt you in the spirit of the surgeon who is very, very sorry indeed that he has to
make you undergo this extremely painful operation. But it is in your best interests and there really
is at least a 50-50 chance which you may survive. And so therefore in perfectly
scientific medical spirit, people may be very arbitrarily and without due process,
deprived of their civil rights, incarcerated, in prisons that are in many cases much worse than
prisons for criminals. And generally left to rot, be neglected and ignored and when bumpsious,
given shock treatment or put in solitary confinement. For what? Because they have unorthodox
and heretical states of consciousness. A lot of these people are not dangerous until
provoked into being dangerous by being ignored by being treated as machines and in generally
defined as non-human. And if you are defined as non-human, this precious little you can do about it.
Because everything you say that sounds human will be taken as a kind of utterance of a mechanical man,
as imitating humanness out of lunatic cunning. You will be suspicious. Everything you say will
be listened to in a different way and with different ears. And you will have one hell of a time
talking yourself out of it. Because there are really unknown rules as to what one must do
when incarcerated for having unorthodox consciousness. There is no clear road to repentance.
And this is found likewise in jails, where people are incarcerated on one to tenure sentences
as in places like Vaccaville, California. When I visited such prisons, young men have come to
me in perfect desperation, saying, I don't know what's happened to me because I want to
live like a decent citizen. I know I've done things that are wrong, but I simply don't know what
is expected of me here. If I try to do what's expected, they say I'm compliant. And that seems
to be some sort of a sickness. Thomas Sass drew attention to this when he quoted a discussion
of the types of school children who may very well need therapy. There were over-achieving children.
There were under-achieving children. There were children who exhibited erratic patterns.
There were children who were sort of a dullly mediocre. In fact, every sort of child can be
given a diagnostic name for his behavior would sound sick. As young ones suggested, life itself
is a disease with a very poor prognosis. It lingers on for years and invariably ends with death.
And I submit that in our present knowledge of the human mind, such power in the hands of psychiatrists
is amazingly dangerous. For I would suggest that today we know about as much concerning the human
mind as we knew about the galaxy in 1300. And that while there are indeed individuals who are
certainly able to perform psychotherapy, it is the cherished arrogance for anybody to say that he
is officially qualified to do so. We do not know how it is done. Just as we do not know really,
how musical artistic and literary genius is done. You cannot really teach it. You can put the tools
for doing these things into people's hands and you can show them how to use the tools.
But whether they will use those tools with genius is quite unpredictable.
And this is above all true of the art of psychotherapy. We don't know how it's done.
We've got some vague ideas. There are probably some people who, by reason of their mental
arrangement, are probably not qualified to perform it because they are maybe out just to make other
people into messes. But to say that there are certain standards and certain examinations that
can be passed and certificates that could be issued, which do indeed qualify people for this work,
is I think penicious nonsense. And is used, of course, out of economic self-interest,
when those who consider themselves the official therapists run into competition,
the same was done by religion. I was talking, imagine it to a Buddhist priest in Thailand some
years ago. I was looking at some books in a book shop in the precincts of a Buddhist temple.
And I was wandering over and I noticed a book on a certain form of Buddhist meditation.
And I'm murmured, hmm, Saty Patana, which is the name of a certain kind of Buddhist meditation.
And a voice suddenly said to me, you practice Saty Patana? I looked up. And there was a skinny Buddhist
monk in a yellow robe with rather red eyes looking at me. I said, not exactly Saty Patana,
I use a different method, it's called Zen. Oh, Saty Patana, not Zen. I said, oh, well,
it's something like it, isn't it? No. Well, it's rather like yoga, I said, isn't it? Not yoga, no,
Saty Patana, different. Only right way. Well, look, I said to him, I have a lot of Roman Catholic
friends who tell me that their way is the only right way. Who might have believed? You know,
I said, you're like someone who's got a ferry boat, but crossing the river, I use the Buddhist
similarly. And another fellow down, the stream has opened up ferry business. And you go to the
government and say, he's not authorized to operate a ferry boat because he's competition to you.
Let all operate ferry boats who will. And if you haven't got the sense to get off to stay
off one that sinks, it's your fault. And after all I could say to him, you believe that
everything that happens to you is your own karma. Why worry? But now, it's so interesting that
since official psychiatry. And I underline that word official because I hope those of you in
this audience who are therapists will regard yourselves as unofficial. Please, I'll give you an
out. But nevertheless, official psychiatry is curious things in common with Western religion,
as well as with Eastern. I said only in so far as it has an interest in states of consciousness
and in clients to regard other states of consciousness than the ordinary as sick.
But it has one very important feature in common with Western religion.
And that we have to go a little bit into Western religious history.
And ask ourselves, what in Western religion and especially in Christianity and this goes also for
Judaism, Islam, what is the great heresy? Curiously enough, the great heresy was first in the West
committed by no lesser person than Jesus Christ, who believed himself to be God.
This of course will be unquestionably true if you think that the gospel of St. John has historical value.
It's a little Vega in the synaptic gospels, but if you read the gospel of St. John,
there is absolutely no doubt about it. For he said, I and the father are one. He who has seen
me has seen the father before Abraham was, I am, I am the way the truth and the life,
I am the resurrection and the life. He said all that according to this gospel.
And that is something that in the Western world you are not supposed to say,
and especially you are not supposed to believe it.
And actually it was very difficult for Jesus because he was saying all this in the context
of the Hebrew culture. And he tried to find language in the Hebrew scriptures,
with which to express his state of consciousness because he had an unusual state of consciousness.
As I read it, he had cosmic consciousness, otherwise known as mystical experience,
otherwise known as Maksha, Nirvana, Bodhi, Satari, Fauna, Elfana, or what you will.
And that happens to people. It has happened as far back as we know. It happens all over the world
and in all cultures. We don't know very much about it. We don't really know ways in which to
make it happen because it seems to be of the nature of it that it is a spontaneous surprise,
but it unquestionably happens. And most people keep their mouth shut about it when it does.
I had a friend who in the middle of having a stroke had this illumination and he said to me,
I fear to speak to my friends at this, but it was the most beautiful experience.
I shall never be afraid of death. In fact, I recommend everyone to have a stroke.
This was my friend Jean-Varda, lately deceased Greek painter.
But Jesus certainly had this transformation of consciousness.
And he was crucified for it. Why? Because he had committed an act of insubordination
and treason against the cosmic government. Because if you believe that God is a monarch
and absolute omniscient and omnipotent authority, shall we say a sort of cosmic ego,
then to claim to be that is to introduce democracy into the kingdom of heaven.
To use up divine authority and to speak in its name without proper authorization.
And they asked Jesus by what authority do you speak of heaven or of men?
And he was tricky about answering that one. He said by what authority did John the Baptist speak.
And they were nervous about answering that one. He could have asked by what authority did
a Isaiah speak, etc. Or Moses. If you believe that God is a monarch and absolute omniscient
and omnipotent authority, shall we say a sort of cosmic ego, then to claim to be that is to
introduce democracy into the kingdom of heaven. To use up divine authority and to speak in its
name without proper authorization. And they asked Jesus by what authority do you speak of heaven
or of men? And he was tricky about answering that one. He said by what authority did John the Baptist
speak. And they were nervous about answering that one. He could have asked by what authority did
a Isaiah speak, etc. Or Moses. But Moses became official authority. And if you could
angle it that what you said was simply an extension of what Moses said because Rabbi Sonso said
it, who got it from Rabbi Sonso, who got it from Rabbi Sonso, who got it from Moses,
then it's okay. Notice this. That to be an authority today in the academic world
depends on documentation. He's not enough to say, for I say unto you, you must put in your
footnotes. Have the more the footnotes, the more the authority of the state.
So our dissertation tends to be books about books about books and our libraries multiply by
my toesus. So when somebody speaks as an authority that means speaks as the author. That's all
it means. It's a statement for which you are the author and therefore for which you
assume responsibility. That is to speak with authority. And to be original is like why
is not to be freaky, but to speak from the origin. That is what Christians mean when they say
to speak in the spirit, to have your mouth possessed by the Holy Spirit as they believe
the mouth of Jesus was possessed by the Holy Spirit. So the gospel of Jesus which of course
was hushed up from its inception was that wake up everybody and find out who you are
asking that again in the gospels and John they pointing to his disciples may be one even
as you father and I are one. And when he was accused of blasphemy the Jews took up stones to
stone him you know and he said many good works have I shown you from the father and from which
of these do you stone me? And they said for a good work we don't stone you but for blasphemy because
you being a man make yourself God. Now listen to the reply. He said is it not written in your law
I have said you are gods and if that is what the scripture says it can't be denied.
So why do you tell me I blaspheme because I say I am a son of God?
No answer. Because I said I am a son of God it doesn't say that in your King James translation
it says I am the son of God and you will see the V italicized and you will think that that is
for emphasis if you don't realise that passages in italics in the King James Bible are
interpolations by the translators. In Greek leaving out the definite article is equivalent of having
the indefinite article we ask to you is a son of God not oh yes to you so son of in Hebrew and in
Arabic means of the nature of when we call someone a son of a bitch we mean bitchy and so if you
call someone a son of God you mean divine of the nature of God as the nice and
great subsequent we defined it he is of one substance with the father but what happened was that
this being blasphemy for the Jews it became blasphemy for the Christians for anyone else than
Jesus to say it they said okay baby it's was so with you but there it stops no more on this business
and as a result of that Jesus was made irrelevant by pedestalization
by being kicked upstairs
in spite of the fact that he said greater works than these that I do shall you do oh no upstairs with
you baby because we just kind of have that sort of thing going on in a monarchical universe we are
not going to have democracy in the kingdom of heaven so this is why the gospel is impossible
because we are supposed to follow the example of Christ where he says for example we not anxious
for the moral do not worry about what you shall eat what you shall drink or what you shall wear
God will take care of you doesn't he take care of the birds don't the flowers grow and they're
wonderful they're crazy they're great what are you worrying about I've never heard a sermon preached
on that never because it's totally subversive the economy would crash
so they say oh yes that's all very well but he was the bus is some
see he had that colossal advantage take up your cross and follow him hey but where I'm in it I don't
know I'm going to be resurrected three days later I can't do all those miracles he had an unfair
advantage so how could you ask us the follow the example of Christ but supposing he didn't have an unfair
advantage supposing that what was true about Jesus as a son of God is true of us
only only a few of us know it and we are pretty careful to be quiet about it
less the same thing happened to us has happened to Jesus and indeed it often does and you know
you'll get these people from Arkansas or Texans or anywhere in the Bible belt who never heard
of the Upanishads and they have this cosmic consciousness experience and they realize that that's
what happened to Jesus they say on Jesus come back well everybody says to me one Jesus is pretty
obvious you're not Jesus you're just you just Joe Dougs well they say he says that's what they said
about Jesus he has a perfect argument except they say you're not much of a Jesus they say all right
if you're Jesus command that these stones mean be made bread and he says a wicked and
deceitful generation seek it for a sign and they're from no sign be given
now why talk about this is it interesting is it important for the human being to realize
that in some sense of the word whatever it means he is God or one with God as is plainly taught
by the Hindus hinted at by the Buddhists only they don't like to put it out as a concept in
case people will use the concept as an idol to hang on to they want you to find out for yourself
and not believe in it and certainly the Taoists understand it the Sufi's understand it a lot of people
understand it that's so what well the importance of it is this that to know that you are God
is another way of saying that you feel completely with this universe you feel profoundly rooted in it
and connected with it you feel in other words that the whole energy which expresses itself
in the galaxies is intimate it is not something to which you are a stranger but it is that with
which you whatever that is are intimately bound up that in your seeing your hearing your talking
your thinking your moving you express that which it is which moves the son and other stars
and if you don't know that if you don't feel that well naturally you feel alien
you feel a stranger in the world and if you feel a stranger you feel hostile
and therefore you start to build those things about to beat it up and to try and make the world
submit to your will and you become a real troublemaker so I feel also one reason why you become
hostile is that feeling that you were just brought into this place that your father and mother
went up to some monkey business that they probably shouldn't have done or it was bad rubber goods
and as a result of this here you are and you didn't ask to be here when you always feel you can
turn around and blame them you can blame somebody you can blame the government you can blame the
rascals you can blame the cheaters always supposing you yourself under rascals which is a long
odds you always can blame someone and say I didn't ask for it take it away
and yet and yet and yet very few people are all too ready to take it away
come you said that the only serious philosophical problem is whether or not to commit suicide
and if you don't if you don't say take it away
well you're going to do you really got to assume responsibility for it
you got to say yes to what happens it's my karma and that doesn't mean merely there are
many missing interpretations of the doctrine of karma it's usually in popularly understood is
that what happens to you either fortunate or unfortunate is the result of good or bad deeds
in a previous life well that's popular superstition the real meaning of karma the word in
Sanskrit means simply doing and if I say of an event it is your karma it is saying it is your doing
so the exposition a book which would expound karma would be not so much a who done it as a you
done it but that seems fantastic now therefore what I propose we do is that we instead of just
idealizing we have a clinical experience you know in psychiatric school and medical school
very usual for a doctor to bring a patient out in front of the students and talk with a patient
as a kind of demonstration he says I want you to recognize the difference between a psychopath
and a manic depressive or a schizophrenia or something they don't know what all these things mean
and a schizophrenia and so he has a dialogue with the patient
right there so let us suppose that I'm the patient and you are the students and the doctors
and I suffer from what you would call the delusion that I'm God
and therefore you might want to do something about me or with me or human me or ask me questions
and so I'm perfectly willing to submit your examination and your treatment and invite you to help yourselves
what did you become god now we married
yes
god, just leave what you're selling for you back
sleeping is like politics
one sleeps on the right side
and then when you're tired of that you sleep on the left
when you're tired of that you sleep on your back
and when you're tired of that you sleep on your stomach
and it is thus that the world goes round
now
you don't become god
yes
we've had the same person
now remember three persons but one god
could I tell you a little bit about Satan
yes
although the matter is a little esoteric
but I told you all about it in the book of Job
where you will see that in the court of heaven
Satan is the district attorney
he is not as christian as a matter
the enemy of heaven
and the enemy of mankind he's merely the person
who sees the bad side of things and carries out the dirty work
and therefore he saw Job
and wondered whether Job really was as great a guy as he seemed to be
and suggested that God should appoint a committee of investigation to find out
and the committee did its work very thoroughly
but the case went against Satan
because it was proved in the end the Job was an honorable man
now you notice that although we pay the salary of the district attorney
whenever there's a great criminal case before the public eye
people begin to take the side of the underdog
and the prosecutor always has less public sympathy
than the defense except in political trials
on the right hand of God
and you know the defense is always on the right hand of the judge in court
is our only mediator and advocate
which is the phrase referring to Jesus Christ our Lord
so there is the defense and there is the prosecution
and it is the function of Satan to be the prosecutor
there is a good deal more to it than that because before all is started
liars in a stage play there was an arrangement in the green room
before coming on stage
in which certain things were understood
but that our only to be revealed when the curtain goes down at the end of the play
it's told God too
yes but he doesn't know it
why do you hide the time so many
why do you hide it's for the same reason you're hiding
yes
who else
man has free will to the extent that he knows who he is
not otherwise
where i got it from
yes to the extent that she knows who she is yes
you know just what he is and man is God
then you say then you say that you are no more than any God in this room
or any man
that is correct i'm no more God than any of you
then you only have the power to know who you are
well that is saying quite a bit yes
but it's not God
what is not God there is nothing that is not God
you learn to do your life
it's like
waking up from a dream
after a while one's experience begins to have
what i would call a haven't we been here before feeling
going round and round and round
and then you begin wondering
where am i going and to answer that question
you have to
turn find out what you want
and so i went into that very thoroughly
what do i want to happen
and of course as soon as you ask yourself that you begin to fantasize
and our amazing technology is of course
an expression of human desire
desire for power for what we want to achieve
so i simply set myself to thinking through how far we could go
and so i soon found myself at a great push button place
where i had a fantastic mechanism
with buttons available for every conceivable thing i could wish
so i spent quite a bit of time playing with those
and science fiction wasn't it
you know you go going like that and here is clear patra
and so on you know and then press this button
a symphonic music in a
four-channel sound
sixteen-channel sound anything you know all possible
pleasures are available
and when you know you're like
everybody's dream of the salton in the palace
you suddenly notice as a button label surprise
you push that
and here we are
yes bottom is of course the problem
bottom is is the other side of creativity
and the energy of creation has as it's that is the yang
the inside of that energy is called boredom
everything of course is fundamentally yang and yin
if you understand that you really don't need to understand anything else
has got what responsibility you feel to a merely right people in the world
as god what responsibility do i feel to a merely right evil in the world
i begin with the
point that i am responsible for the way the world is
if i couldn't feel that i'd have to blame somebody else
i'm not willing to do that
because i know that under various changing circumstances it might be appropriate
for me to be as big a rascal as rascals have been
now has to improve the world
the world is always improving
it may look to some people slow
but it's improving even when it is declining
because the world works in an undulatory process
like a wave it goes up and it goes down it goes up and it goes down
and it couldn't go up all the time because if it did we wouldn't know that that was up
so it goes down some of the time so that we can know when it goes up because if we
didn't know when it went up it would like
it would be like being in a space where everything was light
there'd be nothing to write home about
there would be no black marks on the space
and so would be like a piece of perfectly empty paper
similarly to be in a completely black space
it would also be a kind of unconsciousness with nothing to write home about
there'd be nothing with making a difference
so therefore if you're going to have black
you won't know that it's black unless you have some white
and if you're going to have white you won't know that it's white unless you have some black
correct but that's not a teaching it's a colon
a colon a colon in the Japanese word for a spiritual problem
used in Zen Buddhism
such as what is the sound of one hand
and these problems are given to those who ask questions concerning their spiritual
development
and sometimes as simple pointed out
commandments are given not in the expectation that they will be obeyed
but in the expectation that they will reveal something to those who hear them
that was some Paul's comment on the whole mosaic law
yes sir
one
yes
the hear after is of course now
because if you will examine it closely there is no when else the now
and if you want to make hell of it you can make hell of it if you want to make heaven
of it you can make heaven of it
purgatory purgatory
it's all here
always whilst always will be
what is death
death is an undulation in consciousness
how would you know you were alive unless you'd once been dead
yes
it wasn't unnecessary for him to have material possessions
they said of Saint John the Baptist that he was in a setting
but of Jesus this man
consort with gluttonous and wine bipers and comes eating and drinking
and when the lady Mary
poured precious ointment on his feet
and a night at him
they said the same thing that the
members of the vestry say to the minister today
why this great expense couldn't it all have been sold
for much money and given to the poor
it is a problem sure but you see
in many ways when you get down to these very deep ethical problems
well there sure is no easy decision one way or all the other
you you must look in the at the problem
from the point of view of an artist
which way of doing this
is in some sense greater
it may be better to go off with a bang than with a whimper
let me see here
there is no time my dear it's always now
at every precise moment
yes if you put it that way of course
everything you did on this planet
better now consciously not necessarily because that would spoil the fun
if you press button surprise
you'll press the button so that you forget who you are
right so that you don't always know all the answers to give a problem
yes that's perfectly true this is called in the Bible canosis
in some polls official epistle to the
philippians
he says let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus
who being in the form of God
thought not equality with God a thing to be grasped
but humbled himself made himself of no reputation and was found in fashion as a man
and became obedient to death
and so you get from this the kinetic theory of creation
held by some of the Greek fathers that the creation of the universe
is the self emptying or self forgetting of the godhead
um yes i think it's your turn now
how does the art concept of the creation
people so that men are to see how good good it is
different from the old stories of a man in the universe has this world
so you can feel how good it is
it's really rather like it
because the universe is fundamentally a system
which creeps up on itself
and then says boom
and then it laughs at itself for jumping
and you see every time it does it forgets it did it before
so it never becomes a ball
yes the lady in red
can you think yourself into a point of consciousness
the child of the cosmos such as Dr. Billy who's teaching the place right
and talking about the story
yes but it doesn't necessarily travel
the question is can I make myself into a point of consciousness and travel around the cosmos
and see things from all sorts of places i say yes but it isn't necessarily
a travel one is already there
in other words uh i'm using your eyes
where you are
like you're using mine
just in the same way my head is not my feet it uses my feet
the head is very different from the feet
you couldn't possibly say the head in the feet of the same
but they are one organism
two
what do i do about boredom
press button surprise
oh it's always this
yes always
yes the lady in purple here
we talked about four of it's teaching me at least my own case and they do many people
but when the biggest problem is in life it's a force to run a living as something
that you do not want to grab a few words
and i often wonder is the answer to
once somewhere and live on less money and do the thing that i would like to do
or must i resign myself as many people have to
do the thing that gets me to bread and then in my spare time
so i'm trying to make up what is ninety days and weeks and years
at this time of how it would be
well what is it?
well there are two sort of answers one of which you were ready indicated
which is to do with less and do what you want
it would be more
which when did that
you know those things and many of the things that we saw in my second part of life
i think the objection
if everyone did that is rather like asking what would happen
if everybody wanted to catch the four o'clock train to grab from Grand Central
to Westport
or if all the
molecules of air in this room was suddenly to congregate over in that corner
there is a bear chance that it might happen but a very low
yes you say we're going around at circles trying to admit that
because we never will hate you might not be at you
yes we are going round in circles
but you see going round in circles as you may have observed by looking at the sky
is what the universe is doing
you see
this fall
yes
yes that's the thing it's a dance
and when you dance you don't dance to get somewhere
yes all right but you turn when you wake up you turn the confusion into a dance
and so I go back to your question
what is the alternative to clearing out of the job you're doing
and to say doing with less but having more fun
well there are ways of making almost any activity into a dance
supposing you would have to drive a bus in New York
which is a very harrowing job in the ordinary way
you must not take seriously anything about it
this is the first room that it doesn't matter a damn if you don't get there on time
but it would be fun to go as fast as is consistent with safety
and therefore you swing that bus and you play things at the horn
you take the whole thing lightly as if it is not serious
and because and this is the nature say in ritual
when you have a procession
now people who don't understand religion don't know how to make the right kind of
processions
there are those who go in military march and they don't understand it because their objective
is to get there
there are those who don't like ducks
and they don't understand because
they are trying to be identified
on the other hand and are those who walk as if they had already arrived
and this is the way kings walk
because a king is the center and he is always where it's at
where it's at is where the king is by definition
so if you work in this way
even people who are practicing meditation
take up monotonous things for fun
and meditation is supposed to be fun
I hope John Lily told you that this morning
where you say you're going to do
or money padme home
or money padme home
you can really have a gas thing
and so that anything monotonous can be treated in the same way
this is the way one of the ways of overcoming boredom
this boredom is the great problem for energy
the energy is always on the go
yes the gentleman the white shirt
does it bother you because
mythic no mythic is a great word
does the question is is it bother me to be called mythic no
myth is very powerful myth is fun
myth is stories told to children
everybody loves them
yes sir what is God omniscient
well it depends what you mean by the word
a lot of people think that omniscient is like
knowing everything that's in the encyclopedia Britannica
that's not omniscience that's elect intellectual elephant tiasis
now you see let me explain this question because it's always important
and when anybody announces that he or she is God
people say it once well will you tell us in millimetres the height of mom
blonde
uh... when i say look it up in the insatiipedia it's there
thing is this
what we ordinarily call knowledge
is the translation of life into words
and that is a very cumbersome process because
if we had to translate the process into words every time we took a breath
we had never get around to it
it takes so long to describe and think through the whole physiology of breath
therefore we do it without thinking about it
and i find that i'm shining the stars and just the same way
i mean if you wanted in words it's going to take us a long time to get through them
because words are strung out in a line
if that is understood
turnfully you are
and your whole task
are not as good as it is
you're not going to find your mind
hard to find the truth of this work
not as if you're standing behind this
praying for you in the next time
how do you if you are God how do you find such difficulty in finding peace and
tranquility in yourself
that's because you're looking for it away from the place
in which you are
you are seeking it apart from the experience which you have at this moment
and you are regarding that experience and saying
as pretty allows you are like something better than that
but the trouble with that is that it splits you into pieces
and once you're split into pieces you lost
because you made a difference between the experience you are now having
on the one hand and yourself who is having it on the other
and you wish you could get away from that experience
now the truth of the matter is you can't
because you are what you experience
it's a myth purely that there is some sort of experience
sir who has the experience
you are what you know then because it is not i
know something there is simply a process called the knowing
you could say the knowing like the world has two poles
north and south and so the knowing ball
has the nowhere in the known but only in that sense
now knowing changes it changes itself
but if you try to stand outside it and change it
it will be like standing outside your hand and trying to move your hand from outside
and so comes the difficulty
in other words this would be a difficulty
for god in the press button surprise situation
where you think you want something different from what you have
but if you do think that you've got to ask yourself the question what it is that you really
want
this is the most fundamentally important question
and you will find if you go into it very very deeply that you have it
now you may change your mind about it but
you do have what you want
god this place caught on fire i would find myself so scared
that i wonder if i would also feel that i was god
and if i am god and scared
what do i do about that
well
one of the ways of not being bored is to scare yourself
don't we all go to that we go to the movies
just to be scared
we put certain limits on it indeed before we go and say it's a
well this isn't really going to happen it's only a play or a movie
and therefore while we see the safe outline of the procedure march
back in the back of our minds as the sort of hinting it down cover we know it's only a play
how do you know it isn't
if you see after all the totally the task of the actor on the stage
is to come on so well that the audience thinks it's real
so that he has them crying so that he has them shaking with fear so that he has
them sitting on the edges of their chairs
well that's just one ordinary joddoks actor but supposing the actor of the
play is the real big actor
wow that play with seam real and so that's what happens when the house got
his on five
yes lady in red
yes you're looking behind yourself
what is sleep the seventh day
well on when is the seventh day when you sleep
yes yes god the only reason i know that i'm god is because i take the responsibility
yes that answer the lady's question about the fire
oh yes that also it wouldn't would answer it yes it's a question of taking responsibility
for what happens
if i don't do anything about the world the bottom
well that's another way that's another way you can explore boredom
you can borrow into boredom
and watch it sometimes when you're bored that's the only thing to do
because even for god you can't lift yourself up by your own bootstraps
because that is by nature of the the definition impossible
yes i think that would be fun
i mean why else does one go on stage except to make myths
what
excuse me what did you say
what is my motivation for going on the stage that is like asking why is the
universe
well now if you listen to George Leonard last night
George Leonard explained how children were befuddled by being taught to ask why about
everything
because you always look away from what you're asking about to its antecedents
and that will lead you anywhere at all
why am i here
and i answer that question then somebody says well why that
and then somebody says well why that why that why that and you get back and back and
eventually you get tired of answering
and so fathers when their children say why daddy why why they say oh
shut up in each your lollipop
so but what happens you see when we trace the causation of things into the past
it all begins to fade out
in silence and no answer
why
because he didn't begin there
the universe begins now he didn't begin in the past
and the past trails back from now like the wake of a ship
do you have everything in there's no time
now what is the role of the chance
if everything is god and there is no time except now
what is the role of chance
chance pairs
with order we'll say randomness we'll call it and it pairs with order
and it is part of the nature of order
if you know what you mean by order
you know that you mean contrast with randomness
and if you know what you mean by randomness you know that you mean contrast with order
so if you want to have order you must have randomness
and vice versa
yes
yes but he came out in a different way
yes
you think you're god and you try to go into too much social action
and change the levels of this world
you're in a pretty yourself and a lot of people you're playing
and you're not really being gone
well i admit to you my dear that this is a very very dangerous conversation
and that that i thoroughly agree with but we didn't come here did we
to play it safe
all all profound ideas and profound questions are dangerous
it is dangerous to go into science
as we all know too well it is dangerous to go into medicine
dangerous to go into writing because the pen is often
mightier than the sword
and so i don't think we should withdraw from certain things
because they're dangerous but i entirely agree with you that if i were
as it were in the spirit of god to go about social reform
i would be failing to realise that the construction of my own universe
which is that when you interfere with it you've got to know exactly how you're interfering
otherwise the most amazingly unexpected things will happen
so when people ask the miracles they don't realise what the miracles involve
i mean if i turned the microphone into a rabbit it's all together possible that you might drop
dead because those events might be connected
did i have a study with cow your mind of a study with him i knew him
and i read a lot of his writings yes
watching your saying i think watching it or no more
being aware of yourself you applied with his separations somewhere
it does in a way yes and it depends how you're watching
there is a very interesting thing that comes up in this respect
with regard to the bugger buggita and to the yoga sutra
where they talk about the witness
there is as it were behind our ordinary self with its emotions and
involvement a witness self that does nothing more than perceived what happens
and this is the upman or the purusa which is not involved
and some of you know that are especially in times of crisis
have suddenly discovered this sort of witness center behind everything that just isn't
involved most terrible things can be going on but the witness is in passive
now when we go into these states
we've got to be very careful of our descriptive language
because the descriptive language makes the witness seem something apart from what is happening
in such a way that if we want to become
really sort of skitsy and catatonic about things we can all always be withdrawn
and go in and in and identify ourselves with a solitary and uninvolved witness
who is merely a hang out for the ego
as when the police raider house in which there are burglars
and the burglars know they'll be caught if they're on the ground floor so they got the first floor
so then the police come up with the first floor they're up in the second
they finally get to the roof well the open sky and the infinite
and in this way this was why the Buddha did not teach about the atman
the real self within us because he knew people would use the real self as a hideout for the ego
and so
when a say Christian emoti tries to explain this
he he doesn't talk about the witness
he talks about awareness and people say to him but who is aware what is aware
and
he seems a little sticky in his answer here
because what is what is the matter is that the people asking the question to be
witched by grammar
they are using a language in which it is part of the grammatical convention
that the verb always have a noun subject
now how and earth do verbs get started by nouns i ask you
how can a thing start a process
surely this is really the same problem they can't was wrestling with
when he tried to find out how spirit could influence matter
or how mind could influence body because everybody knows that all proper ghosts
walk straight through walls without disturbing the bricks
so how can the ghost in the machine
as cursed upon it the soul in the body how can you do anything to the body
there's no connection two different realms
there's a point is when we're talking about this awareness
what we call thought feelings and sensation emotion we could say in a very
clumsy way is it's aware of itself
it's the very nature there wouldn't be sensation without awareness
you don't have to have some thing
which is aware of it
any more than you have to have a thing called lightning
which does something called flashing
the flashing is the lightning
and so awareness is the one who's aware of it
could say this awareness if i say i am aware
the word i as William James suggested is simply a word of position like this or here
awareness here
and you're aware and it's there
yes sir
yes life is like one great co-on
no death is not the solution it has no solution
otherwise it wouldn't happen
you see the thing is like this this is what is hard for
Westerners especially to understand
i said if you understand the young and the young you don't need to ask any further
questions and all you e-jing buffs or to know this by now
what is not a component of Western common sense
is that nothing is something
now that may sound a little contradictory but i think i can explain it
we treat nothingness as if it were
ineffective
as if
it wasn't really important at all
and yet when we look out at the night
and we see all these stars in space
try and imagine what the heavens would look like if there weren't any space
then obviously there wouldn't be any stars
i mean you could think they would all be jammed together in a lump
there are various objections to that how would you see the edge of the lump
and no it was a lump without space around it
furthermore we know when we investigate the constitution of matter physically
that at the atomic level there's more space in something than there is anything else
most of it is empty
and which led to physicists that the argon lab at the university of Chicago had become a little nutty
he was so impressed with the emptiness of matter that he went around
to the most enormous padded slippers in case he should fall through the floor
so now what the point i'm making is this
if space is essential to solid it's perfectly obvious then
that nothing is essential to something
if you can't have something without nothing
it means nothing is pretty powerful stuff
because something comes out of it
like that it's a dogma of western thought
we expressed in the Latin phrase ex-nihilony of it
out of nothing comes nothing but that's not so out of nothing comes something
now you would say well if there's something comes out of nothing
there must be some kind of mystery inside nothing it must have a secret structure of some kind
i mean there must be sort of electrical going on this is trouble they have about cosmology
how could this world generate could just be out of free floating hydrogen
no which is it much simpler idea than that it comes out of real solid nothing
