I may take the liberty of beginning by saying something about myself and my
role in talking to me about philosophical matters, because I wanted to be
understood perfectly clearly that I am not a guru. In other words, I talk
about what we call these things and that comprises a multitude of interests concerning
oriental philosophy, psychotherapy, religion, mysticism, etc. I talk about these
things because I'm interested in them and because I enjoy talking about and every
sensible person makes his living by doing what he enjoys doing and that explains
me. Now, I'm saying therefore that I am not a guru, that means also that I'm not
trying to help you or improve you. I accept you as you are. I'm not out there for
to say if the word. Of course, when a stream of bubbling spring flows out from
the mountains, it's doing its thing and if a thirsty traveler helps himself, well
that's fine. When a bird sings, it doesn't sing for the advancement of music, but
if somebody stops to listen and is delighted, that's fine. And so I talk in the same
spirit. I don't have a group of followers. I'm not trying to make disciples because
I work on the principle of a physician rather than a clergyman. A physician is always
trying to get rid of his patients and send them away healthy to stand on their own feet.
Whereas a clergyman is trying to get them as members of a religious organization so that
they will continue to pay their pledges, pay off the mortgage on an expensive building.
And generally, the long-to-the-trash boost its membership and thereby prove by sheer weight
of numbers, the veracity of its tenets. A my objective is really to get rid of you. So
that you won't need me or any other teacher. I'm afraid some of my colleagues would
not approve of that attitude because it is widely believed and said that in order to advance
in the spiritual life, whatever that is, it is essential that you have a guru and that
you will call to that guru perfect obedience. And so I'm often asked the question, is
it really necessary to have a guru? I can answer that only by saying yes, it is necessary
if you think so. In the same spirit as it is said, with anybody who goes to a psychiatrist
or has thought to have his head exam. Of course, there is more in that saying than meets
the ear. Because if you really are sincerely concerned with yourself and are in such confusion
that you feel you have to go to a psychiatrist to talk over your state, then of course you
need to go. Likewise, if you are in need of someone to tell you what to do to practice meditation
or to attain a state of liberation near Varnan, Maksha, or whatever it may be called,
and you feel that necessity very strongly, then you must hurt because as the poet William
Blake said, the fool who persists in his folly will become wise. However, I do want to point
this out. What is the source of a guru's authority? He can tell you that he can speak
from experience, that he has experienced states of consciousness which have made him profoundly
blissful or understand or compassionate or whatever it may be, and you have his word for it.
And you have the word about the people who likewise agree with him, but each one of them
and you in turn agree with him out of your own opinion and by your own judgment. And so it
is you that are the source of the teachers' authority. And that is true whether he speaks
as an individual, or whether he speaks as the representative of a traditional church.
You may say that you take the Bible as your authority, or the Roman Catholic Church.
And the Roman Catholic following, very often says that the individual mystical experience
is not to be trusted because of its liability to be interpreted in a whimsical and purely
personal way, and that it has to be guarded against excesses by the substantial and objective
traditions of the church. But those traditions are held to be substantial and objective.
Only because those will follow, believe it to be so. They say so. And if you follow it,
you say so. So the question comes back to you. Why do you believe? Why do you form
a small opinion upon what basis does all this rest? Well of course, almost everybody is
looking for help. Unless when I was younger, so much younger than today, I never needed
anybody's help in any way. But there is this feeling of a certain helplessness.
Of being alone, somewhat confused, in an unpredictable way with external world of happenings.
And this world of happenings includes enormous amount of suffering, tragedy. And we wonder
why we're here, how we got here, and ensure what to do about the capital P problem of capital
L life, to which should be added death, because it seems to be certain that we're all going
to die, and that death may be a painful process. Those we love are going to die, and so
what about it, is there any way in which we can become masters of the situation? Well, there
are all sorts of ways of trying to escape from the human predicament of being a lonely,
isolated consciousness in the midst of this enormous and way would not self. We can of course
try to beat the game on a material basis by becoming very wealthy or very powerful. We may
resort to all kinds of technology to get rid of our sufferings, hunger, pain, sickness, and
so forth. But it will be noticed that as we succeed in these enterprises, we are not satisfied. In
other words, if you feel at this moment that an increase in income would solve your problems,
and you've got an increase in income, this would give you a pleasant feeling for a few weeks.
But then, as you well know, if that's ever happened to you, the feeling wears off,
and you may stop worrying about paying your debts, and start worrying about whether you will get sick.
There is always something to worry about. And if you are very rich indeed, you've still got
the anxiety about sickness and death, and also anxieties about revolution, and about whether
the eternal revenue service will take it all away from you or capture for cheating on your taxes,
or put you in prison for no good reason. Although it's always this worry, and so you realize
that the problem of life does not really consist in your external circumstances, because you worry
whatever they are. The problem consists in rather in what you call your mind. Could you,
by some method, could troll your mind so that you won't worry, and how on earth would you do that?
Well, that are those people who tell you that the best answer is to think positive thoughts.
To be peaceful, to breathe slowly and hum gently, and get yourself into a peaceful state of mind
by repeating affirmations, such as all is light, all is God, all is good, or whatever it may be.
But unfortunately, it doesn't always work, because you have an acting suspicion in the back of your mind,
that you are simply hypnotizing yourself and whistling in the dark. What the Germans call
a hinting a dunker, which is a thought concealed way, way back to hand your intellect,
but it has a knowing to systems. What if? And so you realize that this matter of controlling the mind
is no superficial undertaking, because although you may be able to smooth the ruffles of your consciousness,
there is beneath that vast area of unconsciousness, which erupts as unpredictable as events
in the external world. And so you consider serious to be the possibilities of psychoanalysis,
to go down and get into those depths and see if oil can be put on those troubled waters.
And then, of course, you get into the guru business. You have to go to someone,
against whose mirror you can reflect those aspects of yourself, of which you are not directed
aware. So as the process goes on, you find, there is something awkward about all this,
and this awkwardness can be expressed in many different ways. One of them is this,
how on earth are you to get at yourself, to do something about yourself?
Because it's a project not unlike trying to pierce the point of the pin, with the point of the same pin.
In other words, if you feel that you could do with some sort of psychological or spiritual improvement,
obviously, you are the character who's going to have to bring this above.
But if you are the one who needs to be improved, how are you going to accomplish the improvement?
You're in the predicament of trying to lift yourself up off the floor by pulling your own bootstraps,
and as you all know, that cannot be done, and if you attempt to do so, you're likely to land the bang on your fany.
And be lower down when you were in the first place. So that problem continually arises,
and it has arisen historically, in all the great religious traditions, we find it in Christianity,
in the debate between St. Augustine and Pilators.
And Pilators said that if God had given us a commandment to love Him, to love our neighbors,
He would not have done so unless we could obey it. St. Augustine counted and said,
yes, but the commandment was not given in order for it to be obeyed. God never expected that it
would be obeyed, because we were in capable of loving anyone but ourselves.
The commandment was therefore given to convince us of our sinfulness, from which we could be rescued
only by divine grace that is to say by the infusion of our souls with the power beyond Him.
And that was more or less the doctrine of which the church settled. The puzzle has always been
that, how to get grace, because grace is apparently freely offered to all,
but some people seem to get it, and some don't, with some the medicine takes, and with others,
it doesn't. Why? Well, apparently, you have the power to resist grace, but if you do,
you also have the power not to resist it. We would like therefore to know how not to resist it and to be
open. And there you see, we are back at exactly the same problem with which we begin.
It's like saying, you must relax. Down you. Let go. You're in. And I know I ought to give in.
I know I ought to let go and abandon my will to the divine will, but as some Paul put it so
well, so well, to will is present with me, but how to do that which is good, I find not.
For the good that I would I do not, and the evil that I would not, that I do. In other words, we all
come down to evasace in ourselves, which we will call, the first of all, since we are in the Jewish
temple, the Yatsahara, or the way with spirit, which God is supposed to have put into the soul of Adam,
or in my translation, our element to be reducible rascality, where we are all basically scams.
And if you haven't found that, you're very unconscious. I know all sorts of people who are full of
out of love, but of course, it always turns up the very deep money, and where it comes to money,
the virtue flies out of the window. So we do have that element in ourselves, we know it very well,
and the question is therefore, once again, how can it be transformed? But if the transformed
is the one who is afflicted, who transforms the transformer, it's the old problem of who guards
the guards, who pleases the policeman, who governs the government, and it seems perfect in the
sky and go for that reason alone that it is a vicious circle. There's a great deal of talk about
yourselves, the lower self or ego, the higher self, called the spirit or the atman,
and the duty of the atman seems to be to transform the wretched little ego.
Or sometimes it does, but a lot of times it does, so we asked why doesn't so-and-soes atman
succeed in getting through. This is ego too strong, if so, who will weaken it?
This is atman too weak, and if so, why, for surely not all that man is the same,
the puzzle remains. So let's take a look at what we're trying to accomplish.
We're trying to get better. We are out after that type of experience, which we will call the
positive, the good, the light, the living, and to get away from the negative, the evil,
the dark, and the dead. Unfortunately, however, human experience, human consciousness
knows by contrast. We are equipped with another system, where the neurons either fire or don't fire.
All that we are aware of is made up of an extremely complicated arrangement of yes and no.
And by recording on magnetic tape, it impulses, there are areas where there is a pulse,
and there are areas where there is not a pulse. And by so doing, we can tape almost any form
of human experience. In other words, we can put colored television on the tape so that it is all reduced
to a matter of yes and no. And you will understand, because that is the philosophy of the Chinese
book of changes, the aging, which represents all the situations of life in terms of combinations
of the yarn or positive principle and the yarn of the negative principle. Interestingly enough,
a Latin translation of the aging was read by the philosopher Leibniz, and from this he invented
binary arithmetic, where in all numbers can be represented by 0 and 1, and that is the number
system used by the digital computer, which lies behind all our electronic ingenuity,
this great extension of the nervous system, which is based on the same principle.
But you see what we are trying to do. We are trying to have yarn without yarn. We are trying
to arrange a life game in which there is winning without losing. Now how can you arrange such a
state of affairs? A game in which everybody wins would end up as WS Gilbert put it. When everybody
is somebody, there no one is anybody. If we are all equally happy, it is impossible to know that
we are at it because a certain flatness comes over everything. If we lift it up all values
and lower it all mountains, we should have the sort of thing they are attempting to do with
bulldozers and the Hollywood Hills, to the destruction of the ecology, in ghastly fulfillment of
the biblical prophecy, with every knowledge, every value should be exalted, and every mountain
laid low and the rough places made plain. And I'm sorry to say it was either I say it,
who understand that is dedicated, who made that remark, but the same as I have also said,
something that at least Christians do not often quote, which is this following sentence,
I am the Lord and there is none else. I form the light and create the darkness. I make peace and
I create evil, either Lord who all these things, in spite of which everybody is busy trying
to be good, not realizing that we would not recognize saints unless there were symbols,
or sages, unless there were fools. And there is no way out of that dilemma. That is why
Buddhism represents existence in terms of a wheel called the Pawrachakra, the wheel of
becoming of birth and death. And on the top of that wheel, there are devour people who we would
call angels, and at the bottom of the wheel that are nara kha, or tormented people in purgatory,
and you go round and round. Now this way, now that way, it's really like a squirrel cage,
where you're running and running running to get to the top, and yet you have to run fast and fast
to stay where you are. And that's why there is always the sense of the more you succeed in any
scale of either worldly or spiritual progress, the more you have the haunting feeling that you're
still in the same place. So you think now there must be some way out of that.
Perhaps there's something ambitious and proud and wrong in aspiring to be enlightened or compassionate.
Perhaps there's a great dose of spiritual pride in that that I, by my efforts, could make myself
into a Buddha or a saint. And therefore, perhaps the thing to do is to try to eliminate all desire.
Not having with the desire for worldly success, but likewise the desire for spiritual success.
For the Buddha proposed that desire was the root of suffering, and therefore suggested to his
heroes that if they eliminated desire or clinging, they might cease from suffering.
But you must realize that the so-called teachings of the Buddha are not doctrines in the sense
that the Jews and the Christians and the Muslims have doctrines. They are proposals.
They are the opening steps in a dialogue. And if you go away and try not to desire, in any way,
you will very quickly discover that you are desiring not to desire.
And so we very rapidly come to a situation where you discover that with regard to your own transformation,
everything you try to do about it doesn't work. It may have some sort of temporary success to
make you feel better. But again and again you come back to the same old knowing problem.
And that is why people interested in spiritual things tend to move from one sect to another,
from one teacher to another, always hoping that they will meet one who has the answer.
Of course, then there are many teachers who say, indeed there is nothing you can do.
And therefore you have to practice non-doing as the Taoists call it,
well, way, non-striping. But then you find in turn that it's extraordinary,
difficult, not to strive. It's like trying not to think of a green elephant and immediately you think of it.
And so you come to the dismal conclusion that you can neither achieve what you want to achieve,
that is to say liberation from the alternation of the opposites by striving,
nor can we achieve it by not striving. And thereby you will learn that you cannot concentrate
on purpose. It's like trying to be unself-conscious on purpose, or to be genuine on purpose,
or to love on purpose, when you say, I ought to love, but that puts you in a double bond.
And we say a person, well, he's trained himself to be deliberately unself-conscious,
or he has very disciplined spontaneity.
Well, what we will look for was somebody who's spontaneity was genuinely,
so that the scaffolding didn't show it. And we believe that there are such people,
like children, but they don't know how interesting they are, and when they find out they become
brands. Imagine for a moment that it was your privilege to have a brief interview with God,
in the course of which we're allowed to ask one question. What would you ask?
Now you would have to think this over very carefully, because this golden opportunity
would come to you only once, and you would have to be most careful, that you didn't ask the silly question.
Well, you might try God out with a Zen Buddhist coin,
such as, beyond the positive and the negative, what is reality?
And the Lord would turn to it, say, my dear child, your question has no meaning,
and you wouldn't have the opportunity to think up a meaningful one and come back.
So perhaps you should have asked, what question should I ask?
And the Lord would say to you, why do you want to question?
See, it seems you do one one version,
because you feel that something is wrong if you don't have a pity,
when you've got one, that is, the insoluble problem of trying to win without you.
Now as long as you can keep that problem, you'll be busy.
Only however, until you see that it can't be solved, but there are all sorts of ways of presenting that problem
in such a way that you cannot see that it's meaningless, and the better gurus are very clever
at bringing these ways out.
You may see, for example, if you are invited to practice intense concentration,
that after a while, you can find yourself thinking about concentrating,
and therefore, that your concentration has somewhat divided
or he may ask you why are you concentrating? What is your motivation for this activity?
And you find out that it's your element to be reducible or askality.
So however, the teacher once he has seen that we've mastered that lesson, has something still more ingenious.
He says, now, you have met you actually made purpose,
because finding out that you could not really concentrate.
It was valuable because it began to prick the illusion of your ego.
But you've only got your foot in of the door.
Beyond this, are many, many higher things to be learned, and you must read up all your efforts.
And so of course, you apply yourself all the more,
again, again, on all sorts of tricks that these old gentlemen can come out with.
And you will keep at it just as long as he can make you fall for it.
But in the end, you see that it was all tricks,
as the great Zen Master, Rinsai said,
well, after all, there was nothing much in your back who's Buddhism.
And he went on to explain to his students that the art of Zen,
or teachings Zen, is like deceiving a child with an empty fist.
You know how you can dream a child by pretending you've got something very precious in your fist.
And you can play a game for an hour,
provoking the child to ever greater enthusiasm to find out what you've got.
And in the end, the revelation is that it was nothing there.
So many people say, in the course of their Zen training, I realized there was nothing to realize.
It was all there from the beginning,
because you see standing opposite to the realization that you can't do anything about it.
And equivalently, that you can't do nothing about it.
Comes across the awakening that the reason for that is, there is no use separate from you.
In other words, when you try to control your thoughts or control your feelings,
there is no difference between the thoughts and the controller.
Because what you call the thinker is simply your thought of yourself.
The thinker is a thought among thoughts, and the feeler is a feeler, a feeling among feelings.
And trying to control thoughts with thoughts is like trying to bite your own teeth.
So you found that out.
Then the other side of the picture is of course,
that if you do find that out, you discover that the project of controlling yourself was unnecessary
because you were yourself a Buddha from the very beginning.
That's what the Upanishads mean, and they say quite simply,
top to Vamasi, you're it.
You, as you are, how can you conceive that?
Supposing you let your imagination go.
And really think through what you would like to happen.
Imagine the most gorgeous state of bliss that you can conceive.
Whether or no worries, no anxiety, no haunting future with unpleasant consequences,
you're in control of the whole works and you're sitting on your lotus.
Perfectly intact.
And I ask you seriously, is that really what you want?
You quite sure that's what you want.
Imagine now, let's get this situation straight.
You've got everything you want.
You're in the highest possible spiritual state that you can conceive.
And yet, I haven't really surrendered myself because I know it all.
I, something I don't know, so please the surprise, you know what would happen?
You would find yourself sitting here in this building, tonight, feeling exactly the way you feel.
There's your answer, because after all, don't you have it all? Look, you have the feeling of yourself.
But the feeling itself depends on their being at the same time, they're contrast.
The feeling of other.
The self has a certain sensation of being in control of life to some extent
through voluntary action.
The will seems to have a certain freedom, and yet on the other hand there are limits to that.
And it seems in the end life sweeps this away and we are overwhelmed by the involuntary.
And yet, the voluntary keeps popping up, new voluntary is coming to the world with every baby.
So you see, you couldn't have the experience you call being a voluntary acting self without the contrast of the involuntary happening.
Now, do you want to be without the involuntary happening?
Do you want to get rid of that?
All right, if you get rid of it, you won't have the experience of the voluntary self.
What would you like to turn it the other way around?
Would you like to have the experience of no voluntary self?
And on the other hand, everything just happened.
Well, then you say, well, I'm not sure about that.
Because then, I would feel at first that I was floating.
See, did I know further responsibilities that I was walking on air?
And we do get that feeling sometimes.
If you take the ideas of determinism and fatalism to their final conclusion,
you do have that sense of freedom from all responsibility, freedom from worry and care.
And you float along for a while, it wears off.
You don't somehow seem to be able to follow out that philosophy consistent,
especially if you have children.
And somehow a society begins to push on you to be responsible
as it pushes on children to be responsible.
And so, this nagging duality keeps coming back
that I cannot realize the nicer responsible condition of involuntary behavior,
unless I have the contrast of the possibility of involuntary and vice versa,
and what does that mean?
Obviously, it means that these two aspects or sides of our experience,
which we can call the voluntary and the involuntary,
the Noah and the Noah, the subject and the object, the self and the other,
although appearing to be two, are indeed one.
Because you can't have one without the other.
And when that state of affairs arises, you know at once that there's a conspiracy.
That two things which look as different as different could be,
offer that very reason, the same.
Now, you can detect even under those actions of yours, which we call voluntary,
the voluntary movement of the muscles or of the mind,
that there are processes which are not voluntary.
You do not will be obliged to circulate.
You do not control by intention, the synapses in your nervous system,
and yet you would be incapable of any voluntary action,
unless those involuntary processes were going on.
So, you see these two things go together.
And you begin to realize something which is rather difficult to describe.
That what you call your experience is a do happening.
We don't have good words for this.
We have some words which have the sort of sense, like the word cleave,
which means to stick together or to hold together and also to split.
And the word sake in Latin means holy and the cursed.
And so, I would like to propose we also find some word for a do happening,
because it's all a do happen.
That's what good is mean when they talk about come,
the word come means action.
And when something happens to you, be it good or bad.
They say it is your come.
That means, quite simply, it is your do it.
But you say, I didn't mean to do that.
Now, one school of thought will explain it by saying,
but you see you did something in a former life or at a former time,
which now has this consequence.
But that's a very superficial understanding of come.
You don't need to believe in reincarnation,
to understand come.
Come are simply that you don't let your left hand
know what your right hand is doing.
That was one aspect you are doing what you call the environment
and with the other aspect you were doing what you call the organism,
the meat, this living body.
But as you cannot conceive possibly the existence of a living body
with no environment, that is the clue that the two are basically
one, like the two poles of a magnet,
north is quite different from south and yet it's all one matter.
So in precisely the same way, you are both watching do and what happens to you.
So that you have a little game in which you play,
that what happens to you that you are not responsible for.
That's not you, see?
You are only responsible for this side of it.
And then you can compete with the other side.
What it's like is this, get two knitting pins, one in each hand.
And have a fencing match with yourself and really sincerely try to stick the other hand.
But that other hand is really sincerely trying to stick the first one and also to defend itself.
These like playing chess with yourself, you see?
Now it won't work, it will come to us at a standstill unless you decide for your right hand
that that's the one that's really going to win.
But then you broken the rule of the game, you see?
But that's what we do.
That's what the is called by both the Hindus and the Buddhists,
Avenida, ignorance, which really better means ignorance.
So what it comes down to, you see, is basically this, just in the same way
that the authority of the Guru is your authority, you did.
So the place where you are in life is where you put yourself.
And just as on the surface of the sphere, every point may be regarded as the central
for service. So every place may be regarded as the true place and everyone's in his true place.
Everybody, in other words, put it in what language you will, is the manifestation of the demand
playing this game, that game and the other game.
And you are not knowing it, if you don't know it, is part of the game.
Makes it all the more fun.
Get lost.
You say to yourself, and last you get, like children, love to play hide and seek,
to get lost. Like we all like to go to a play, see a horror movie,
and have a cold shippers because we think the awful awful is going to happen.
Something is going to be seen on the screen, which we can't stand to see.
We won't that be a thrill if we talk about it.
If we all expose ourselves to them, just as children and young people are always exposing
themselves to dreadful things. And the parents get absolutely, they get, they need to keep them.
They think, if it isn't getting drunk or driving hot rods, they take drugs.
And that may ruin their sanity for life. How horrible can it be if they don't take drugs,
they'll do something else. Always to see how close to the point of danger you can get.
And most people who go in for racing cars usually end up in a crash.
And they end up, but the life is all sweet to being played dangerous.
So I would say to those among them, our most deadheads, in the sense of unspiritual and square,
if there are any here, a real stuffy people. Congratulations.
You see, you're playing a very far out game.
See, you're so lost, you don't even know where you're studying.
That's taking a gorgeous risk. Why? Because of you, we might even blow up a gun.
How close are we going to get to that one?
Well, just in the same way, as that car racer, what is the needle going up,
but there are these people feeling more and more and more righteous.
Determine the virtual prevail, washing that needle, go up, it's getting harder and harder and harder.
And finally, they go out in a blaze of glory.
And then when the dust settles, let's say, that was the close squid.
I mean, that was quite a dream. We've worked it out from.
See, where will we go next?
See, here's the point, simply.
That's why I would say that my function is liberative. I want you to see that it's you.
It's not me. It's not Swami's own, so. It's not Buddha's own, so. It's not saints' own, so. It's you. You do it.
As, so Edvin Armin put the words into the mouth of the Buddha, you suffer from yourselves.
None else can tell us. None other holds you that you live and die, and we're upon the wheel,
and hard and kiss its spokes of agony. It's tired of tears, it's a neighbor of nothingness.
And when one of the old Zen masters went to his teacher and said,
what is the way to liberation?
Teacher said, who is restraining you? He said no one. If so, why should you ask for liberation?
If it all bounces back, for you, what do you want? Do you know what you want?
Can you think it through? Say exactly what you want.
And invariably, you'll get back to the place where you are.
Because what you say you want is always the symptom, the expression of what you are now.
If that is the case, it's all there because you're doing it. Why meditate? Why do anything
of a so-called spiritual nature? People don't understand really what meditation is.
They take it up, but they take up psychotherapy or a cause in weight reduction.
In order to be better, but if you do that, you are not practicing what is called janna
or yoga or Zen. That's not it at all. Meditation is the one human activity which has no purpose.
Buddhas who are supposed to obtain everything are invariably shown in some sort of meditation
posture. Why should they meditate anymore? Because that just happens to be the way that a Buddha sits
when he sits. When he sits, he sits. When he walks he walks, he's not going anywhere.
He's just going through a walk. Because he digs it. See, to dig the word very word there's not
merely to appreciate it, but to penetrate it. To go to the heart of the matter and to penetrate
the moment, to get right to the root of the moment is nowhere else than the center of you where
you are as where you start this whole thing. So get, I mean, to get with yourself as to get
at the moment where you begin all this questioning. Where does the question come from? Where does the
desire spring from? Well, that's you and that you is the point from which the whole universe is
created, flowing back into the past like the wake of a ship. Wake doesn't drive the ship.
The ship thinks the way it is. So here you are producing. Meditation is just sitting and watching
it happen. And it's not done because it's good for you. It's done for fun. I might even say
meditation is a fun thing. And if it isn't, you're not minting. There's an awful game that
meditative play, which is competitive suffering. Now they go to some place where they sit for hours
on hand until their legs aching practically fall off. And then come back and brag about they sat
through all those hours of negating. Now it's very difficult to put down people who are suffering.
Because after all one has a natural synthesis of pain. But I sometimes want to say if it
didn't say go through your suffering at you. In that way and that stir it, don't brag about it.
Don't want me by saying, well, I've suffered more than you have. People do things like that they say,
well, I'm more aware of my shortcomings than you are. I'm more tolerant than you are.
I recognize more than you do, what a rascal I am. They're every kind of way, one up in somebody
else, in order to play the game in which I always mean. So once we get into that kind of thing
with the meditation scene, we get into hierarchies and ranks and degrees and who is a tane number
seven, who is a tane number nine and the expert guru will always put a stage higher than anyone
anybody has thought of. It serves to see how far your ambition will run. So this goes on,
enters the atmosphere, enters the atmosphere, until you suddenly wake up and begin real meditation
by realizing that you are there. That you do really meditate all the time by virtue of existing
all the time. Only you miss that eternal now by always looking for something next minute,
expecting a result. Now you can't settle, let me not expect a result,
because one does anything. And so you may just as well sit and enjoy.
