Almost all the great religions of the world are in some way associated with a drink.
Judaism and Christianity with wine is lamb with coffee, Hinduism with the milk of sacred
cows, Buddhism with tea, and in one way or another, these sacred drinks are used for sacramental
purposes and the sacrament defined at least in the Anglican Church as the outward and visible
sign of an inward and spiritual grace is where very common feature of religion throughout
the world, although one which is, I would say, highly disapproved of by many people living
in the modern West under the influence of Protestantism and humanism.
A sacrament, in other words, is a method of giving spiritual power or insight through
corporeal means.
As for example, in the sacrament of baptism, Orthodox Christians believe that through the
pouring on of water, a physical substance, a person may be in some way united with the
power or the grace of God, or that the right formula, said by the right person over
bread and wine, may transform them veritably into the body and blood of Christ so that whoever
partakes of them on the principle that you are what you eat becomes transformed into
Christ.
Behind the more obvious drinks or sacramental liquids associated with the various religions,
there are some religions which employ more potent substances and so one associates Islam
on the whole Arabian culture with the use of hashish and no one can doubt who knows anything
about the effects of the substance, that the people who painted Persian miniatures and
who designed the great Arabesque of Islamic civilization, no one can doubt that those
people had had the sort of vision which comes through participation in hashish.
Likewise, the earliest Vedic texts of India mentioned something called Soma and nobody
really knows what Soma was, but one may guess in view of modern practices in India, that
it was some derivative of the plant canabas which is today in India and has probably
for centuries been used by certain types of yogi. For example, the Shiva worshippers, use
it very widely in the form that is called Bham which is a drink or ganja which is smoked.
In China, there was for a long time in the Taoist school of philosophy, a quest for the
illixial of life and this was associated with Taoist al-Khani and when you read al-Kamical
texts, you must realize that they are always veiled. The Taoist sages were apparently looking
for an illixial immortality that would convert the human being into an immortal and it
was suppose that if you hit on the right illixial, when you became an old man and your skin
was shriveled, it would eventually peel off and reveal a youth underneath as a snake changes
its skin and there are statues in certain parts of China, a venerable old sages with
their skin falling off to reveal a young face below. Many sages and indeed even emperors
died from drinking concoctions that purported to be the illixial of life. One of the ingredients
of the illixial was always tea and of course tea as drunk in Buddhist circles is not the tea
that you ordinarily drink. The real ceremonial tea of the Far East is not steeped tea leaves,
but tea ground, green tea, ground to a very fine powder and this has hot water poured over it
and then with a whisk it is stirred up into a thick mixture and drinking a few cups of this
puts you in a state of extraordinary wakefulness and therefore has long been used by Buddhist
months for purposes of meditation. It has a mild psychedelic or consciousness expanding effect.
The Tibetans likewise brew an incredibly thick tea which they mix with the act butter
and to acid as an appalling concoction but to them very soothing and comforting and also
wakeful and as you know throughout the Amerindian cultures religion is very greatly
centered around divine plants, the use of the peyote cactus, the use of yage of mushrooms such as
psilocybiomexicona, the convivolous type flower, or lukui, the use of its seeds and a very
considerable number of other plants which have been catalogued by Professor Schultes of Harvard.
Even seaweeds all sorts of funny things are considered divine plants and the mushroom
psilocybiomexicona is known of course as taeokanato among the Indians word which means the flesh of God.
To an enormous degree then throughout the world there has been the use going back as far as we
can find any record of some sort of plant either chewed or distilled or boiled or whatever
which transformed consciousness and was alleged to give mankind the vision of divine things.
And therefore it was in the precise definition of the term a sacramental plant.
Now then the objection to this is very strong in the modern west and there indeed have always been people
who found this kind of practice was to be deplored and I want to in a moment to go into the
reasons why. But it must be said in the modern west that the use of any material aid to spiritual
insight or development is always looked upon with this favor because it is described as a crutch.
And our type of culture feels happier if it doesn't use a crutch in other words if you do it yourself.
Somehow or other the use of a crutch or as people call it with that question begging word a drug
seems to be something which is a sign of weakness. If you are a real gutsy fellow and if you are
going to get this thing in a manner which is natural, legitimate and a manner in which it will
really stay with you. You ought to work at it by your own efforts and you will find this extremely
exemplified in sacred and science where they don't want to use even ordinary medicine for physical health.
Even though every Christian scientist is dependent upon daily food, both vegetable and meat
and eats them quite galley without any feeding of guilt. Whereas actually he ought to realize
that if he had sufficient faith, he would be able to live even without air. I suppose air is a crutch
on which we depend and earth is a lamentable ball on which we have to stand in order to hold
ourselves up. But if you explore deeply into the doctrines and the history of almost all religions
whatsoever, you will find that there is simply no do it yourself way, invariably whatever path
and whatever method is followed. There comes a point in which the efforts of one's own will
or if one's own ego have to be abandoned. You know perhaps that in Buddhism there are two schools
which are respectively called Jeriki and Tariki in Japanese. Jeriki means one's own power,
Tariki means another's power and most forms of Buddhism are classified as Jeriki on the
principle of the Buddha's final words to his disciples. Be he laps unto yourselves, be he
a refuge unto yourselves, take to yourselves no other refuge, work out your own deliverance with
diligence. And so in Zen, in Tendai, in the Theravada or southern forms of Buddhism,
you will always find that meditation practice or spiritual growth is a matter of using relentless
effort to control the mind to be concentrated or so on. But as this effort develops, it's term
always is that you reach an impasse in which your will and your ego comes to a state of absolute
frustration, where you find that there is nothing that you can do to reform yourself, to make
yourself unselfish, which is of course a form of lifting yourself up by your own bootstraps.
That not only is the nothing that you can do, but is also nothing that you can not do. In other
words your energy will be as phony as your relaxation. And at this point in the process of yoga or
meditation or whatever it is, there must transpire a state of surrender of total giving up and it is
precisely at this moment that the transformation of consciousness which all these various religions
are after can come about. Because in one way or another, all of the religions without any questions
so far as I can see, all of the I would say the great religions of the world we might exclude a
few weird cults. But all of them are concerned with achieving a state of consciousness,
which is no longer ego-centric. Furthermore a state of consciousness in which we see through a trick,
which during the ego-centric state we always play on ourselves. And that trick is that we become
unable to be aware of the relativity of opposites. Black and white, light and darkness, good and
evil, pleasure and pain, life and death. All these things are, say, oneself and the external world,
well, the self and the other, all these things in the ego-centric state of consciousness seem to be
separated, opposed to each other. Whereas the most elementary logic should tell us that they necessarily
go together. In other words if you are a superior person in any way, morally intellectually, physically,
you have no means of knowing that you're a superior person, except through the presence of
relatively inferior people. Whereas a to disappear you would be in limbo and you wouldn't know where
you were at all. The higher always depends on the lower in the same way as the flower of the plant
depends on the soil, the rows upon the manure. And so to the subjective, the self goes along with the
objective, what the self knows, in an inseparable union. But we have managed to screen this out
of our normal consciousness. And to conduct our lives as if we could make writing exists without
black and light without darkness and pleasure without pain. But when the ego-centric state is
surpassed, it is seen that these things all go together. And the curious consequence of this is not
that the world is felt to be a mere balance between opposed forces. Not a simple compromise,
but somehow it becomes obvious when you see the unity of all opposites. That the world is transformed
into a thing of glory. It's very difficult to explain that logically, but it simply is so with reference
to this different kind of consciousness. In other words, what happens is this that everything
that you tried formally to exclude and to deny and to overcome is seen to be part of a harmonious
construction so that the whole world is seen as profoundly harmonious. With everything in it
is as it should be. And this is so difficult to explain to people who don't see it, but there
are many people who have this kind of experience, remain tongue-tied. Not only is it difficult to
explain to ordinary people, but it's very shocking to ordinary people. Because it seems to undermine
all the game rules and all the moral rules of the social order and to be saying that it's the
evil things and bad things are perfectly all right because they are actually in a secret harmony with
the good. And if you understand that superficially and you are not a very intelligent person or
a very sensitive person, you might indeed run a muck and justify any kind of conduct whatsoever
on the grounds that it's all part of the universal harmony. And this of course is why there has
through all the centuries, being a kind of esotericism, a kind of secrecy attached to these deep
matters, both to the state of consciousness itself and to the various means of bringing it about,
whether those means be sacramental or whether they be some form of meditation, prayer, or other
type of spiritual discipline. In both cases, let me remind you, in both cases, there has always
been a certain secrecy about it. Or rather, these things have not been taught to people or given
to people who were inadequately prepared. And this is a grave grave problem in the modern world
because we are today living in a world where there are very few secrets. That is to say,
scientific knowledge of any kind is of necessity public knowledge, at least public among scientists.
There are types of scientific knowledge, of course, which lay people simply cannot understand
because the language in which this knowledge is expressed, say, for example, mathematical
language has to be learned and is difficult to master. And so many popularizations of scientific
ideas are at the same time partial falsifications because these ideas cannot be said in English or
French or German, or even though they can be said in algebra. So, in a way, all knowledge
guards itself because to understand it, you have to follow to some extent the path which was
followed by the people who discovered it. But nevertheless, as a result of scientific technology
in the modern world, an enormous number of things are very dangerous things are made available to fools.
Not to mention the fantastic powers of destruction, which technology has given us.
And so, it is very difficult indeed to keep secrets in this day and age. Everything has been
published, all the mysteries practically have been let out. And in the thought of ancient Hindu
philosophers, this would be regarded as a sign of the final decadence of the world, the coming
on of the Kali Yuga or the black destructive epoch at the end of the cycle in which the whole
world is destroyed. Be that as it may. So, I would start out by saying then that even among those
religious or spiritual disciplines, which follow along the lines of an extreme exertion of the will,
they those jurity or self-power disciplines, eventually come to a point which is the same as the
tariqi that is to say those that rely on a power outside the individual will beyond or deeper than
the personal ego. They come to the same place. Of course, really the difference between the two
schools depends upon a definition of oneself. If you start out by defining yourself as your ego,
then what is other than you or a greater power than you will seem to be different from you.
But if you start out by defining yourself as something more than your ego,
then the power which transforms you will still be your own. For example,
most people define their hearts as something other than themselves. We say I have a heart rather than I
am a heart. The heart is an engine for most of us which supports the existence of the ego.
And somehow we have it. It's an engine that goes on in us, like the engine in our car,
which if you're not a mechanic, you don't really understand, you just use it. And so if you think
of your heart as other than you, it is something that mysteriously happens inside you beyond your control.
But on the other hand, if you regard your heart as very much you, as the center of your physical
being, then you will be accustomed to think when you beat your heart that you are doing it.
So for people who come in the Judeo-Christian tradition, they are in time to feel that their heart
is not themselves. The Psalmist says, behold, I am fearfully and wonderfully made. He looks at
his own body and has astounded. And says, since I don't understand it, it must be the work of a
god who is other than myself. On the other hand, when a Hindu defines himself, he doesn't define
himself merely in terms of those types of behavior which are voluntary. He defines himself also
in terms of involuntary behavior. And so his heart seems as much himself as anything can be.
So it's really a matter of semantics as to what is self and what is other, within you,
depends where you draw the line. But it seems to be unquestionable that in all spiritual traditions
whatsoever, there comes a point at which the personal ego, the individual will, reaches a limit
by one means or another. And where it is transformed by something that is not wield, but seems
to happen spontaneously. The Christians call it grace. The Hindus call it Prasad.
The Buddhists call it body illumination. But in every case, it happens of itself or as the
Chinese would say, it is done of itself so spontaneous. So there is really no grounds
for objecting to sacraments because they are something that come to us from, as it were, outside
and do something to us which is beyond the control and understanding of the will.
It always is that way. But now, this is not an experience in which the will and the ego
have no part to play, no part at all. And here comes the danger of all types of transformation
of consciousness, mystical experience, sense of union with the divine or whatever you want to call it.
However obtained, it is essential that they be what I would call grounded.
Brought down to earth, harmonized with everyday life and with human society.
And this requires a discipline. Every tradition looks with this favor upon those who simply
steal the divine secrets and enjoy them without some kind of discipline that should go along with it.
And that's the destructive effects of all these things, are particularly manifested in people who
have no capacity for the kind of discipline that must go along with them. And that is true, not only
our sacraments and divine plants and yoga practices, it is true of all things whatsoever
which we might enjoy. Because enjoyment of any kind is really impossible without an
accompanying discipline. Just think of a few things which are pleasurable and which can be
simply snatched and swallowed. Start with candy. Would there be such a thing as a palatable candy
bar? Unless there was some expert in the making of sweet meats. Think of booze, you know?
It isn't just alcohol at one throws down. That is to say if you want to have any lining left
to your stomach. But skillfully prepared winds and licus, requiring they stand a long tradition
of the vintner's art which is a discipline. Consider roaring along the fast car. If you have
an exceedingly short career in this thrill, if you don't know how to drive and the car itself
depends upon the skill of master mechanics. I can't think of any pleasure at all, which does
not require an accompanying discipline. Take sex. A lot of people do. Let's take it like that.
And they I guess have a kick out of it. But it has no profound pleasure to it. Unless
there is the discipline of an intimate relationship with another human being which requires a great
deal of intelligence. And also the nearly physical aspect of sex is a considerable art which
very few people have ever seen to learn. That is why our culture has sex on the brain and is
perpetually thinking about it and perpetually obsessed with it in a kind of vyristic way because
it is so little satisfaction and so little discipline and so little knowledge of how to use it.
So every pleasure whatsoever involves a method of grounding it, a method of integrating it with
everything else. And thus if there are ways of obtaining what is potentially the greatest delight of
all, the sense of the divine or whatever I am using that word as the vagus possible word,
the sense of transcending the gulf between the individual and the eternal universe.
If you snatch that and have that experience and you don't do anything with it and you are not
properly prepared for it, you are liable to get into the same sort of trouble as you would get through
the insensitive use of any pleasurable thing whatsoever. And it is for that reason then that it is very true to say that
psychedelic substances, the chemicals derived from the divine plants are dangerous. There is no question about it.
And especially those like LSD which produce their effects as a result of taking an extremely small quantity.
You know if you want to get drunk on beer, you have to get the putdown quite a bit of it.
And there is a limit to how much beer one can swallow in an evening. It is a pure bulk.
But you don't run into that kind of limit with far more potent substances which don't
involve any difficulty in eating. You see with the way the Indians take peyote cactus it is pretty
difficult to put down. It is nauseating even though they get used to it, but even so to chew all that
stuff. And so there is a limit set that way. But in these highly refined elixirs there isn't that
kind of limit. And our culture is full of plain, downright goofy people who will try anything.
And don't know anything about it. And at the present state of affairs in the United States,
the whole matter of psychedelic substances is in a state of inane confusion which beggars description.
So let me say first of all a little bit about the nature of these things. They are called drugs,
but this is obviously a word which is unclear. There is no definite clear line that can be drawn
between a drug and something used for food, say like vitamins. A group of physicians and a group
of lawyers got together not so long ago to see if they could arrive together at a legal definition
of addiction. That is to say dependence upon some chemical. And they kept finding that whenever
they thought they were right on the definition and they really got somewhere, their definition also
applied to dependence upon a foodstuff. It is a very, very difficult thing to define.
Now as between various types of chemicals that do produce changes in consciousness, there are
wide differences. All of them could be said to be addicting in perhaps a psychological sense.
That is to say, supposing you belong to an in group where taking LSD is a dairy girl.
It is the thing to do. And everybody compares notes as to how often and how much and engage in a
kind of one upmanship with each other as to how often they have been on a trip.
This is acidine because you are following this practice simply to be one of the boys or girls
as the case may be. And to remain in an in group where you should, if you had discipline yourself
in the use of consciousness transformation, you should assume come to see the folly of the
long into an in group. So in that sense, some of these things could be said to be addicting.
Others are addicting in a much more physical sense. The opiates, for example, have very difficult
withdrawal symptoms, if one doesn't use them constantly. But this addicting factor
is not characteristic of all substances used for this purpose.
In other words, not everything that is used for the expansion of consciousness is in our
cutting. This of course is I'm going over things that to some of you are elementary.
The word narcotic means sleep inducing. And that which makes one superrific which does or dims the
senses. So of course alcohol is a narcotic insufficient quantity. Opium likewise is a narcotic
is used for dulling the sense of pain, morphine is a narcotic in the strictest sense of the word.
But substances such as masculine, which is the derivative of peyote or a chemical synthesis
of the same thing that is in peyote, is not a narcotic. LSD is not a narcotic,
psilocybin is not a narcotic from the mushroom, and cannabis is not a narcotic.
Because these substances tend to do something very different from producing sleep.
They tend instead to produce a peculiar kind of wakefulness, a sharpening rather than a dimming of
consciousness. And so they must not be lumped in the same category as things which are true narcotics.
And I would say it would be part of the definition of a true narcotic that is it is also a dicting.
As alcohol is a dicting, as the opiates are a dicting, that you become dependent on them
and only with great difficulty can shake them off. The same is true of course of tobacco.
It is very difficult for a hardened smokeer to drop it. And it is therefore a dicting
although I doubt whether it is actually a narcotic. In the sense of the sleep inducing thing.
Or an insensitive, something that makes you insensitive.
Now our absurdly paranoid government agencies have never learned in 50 years
how to handle these problems. Despite the lesson of prohibition,
the authorities still think that the only way to deal with even dangerous narcotics is simply to suppress them.
Not clearly realizing that this makes them all the more attractive
and that it creates an enormous crime problem which without suppression would not exist.
Because the minute you suppress something and it becomes illegal people know that there must be something
extremely exciting about it. And it is very difficult to suppress these things and you can suppress it
a little bit. In other words you can pick out a few four guys and make terrible examples of them by
electrocuting them or putting them in prison for an incredible number of years.
But this invariably only scratches the surface because when something wrong or illegal is really popular
there is no way of suppressing it because all the hotels in the United States would not be sufficient
to jail or all the criminals involved. This is never worked and why people don't learn from history
is beyond my comprehension. It becomes much worse as people become aware that there are an enormous
number of varieties of things that will produce psychedelic effects and that in particular substance
is LSD can be compressed into some small areas or volumes that their detection is virtually impossible.
So the moment it becomes a racket and something therefore which organized crime can put a good
price on the possibilities of playing games with LSD are enormous. So real good racket and
or all it will do the suppression of it is to encourage the proliferation of crime and
lead total nonsense. We have never really understood what control is. We don't see the difference
between controlling oneself and struggling oneself. In other words their person who is a controlled
automobile driver is certainly not a person who has no car or keeps his car locked in the garage.
A very controlled dancer is certainly not a person who never dances. The control of things is not
the suppression of them but they are used in a sensible and proper way and this has not penetrated
the consciousness of our authorities. You cannot suppress sex, you cannot suppress mankind's
fascination, curiosity for whatever motive in other states of consciousness than the normal.
These things are eternally fascinating to human beings and will always be pursued.
Whether you think it's a good thing or whether you think it's a bad thing makes no difference.
It will be done. So at the present time for example if some people wanted to make experiments
with any kind of consciousness-changing material, say LSD or masculine, they are in the ridiculous
situation that they cannot even pay a psychiatrist to sit with them and take care of them while they
do it because that would be illegal. What they will therefore do is not have a psychiatrist,
not have any experienced or responsible person and they will try it out all on their own without any
preparation and endanger themselves because these things will on the unfavorable circumstances
and with people who haven't got a good psychic balance, bring about prolonged
bouts of psychosis and lead to a good deal of trouble. But the difficulty is that we are as a culture
not prepared for the control of these substances. And that is why there is a panic that is why
we are doing things that are worse than probably worse than allowing them to circulate freely.
I would not for one moment advocate the total free circulation of these things so that anybody
could go into a drugstore and buy it. But I think although I wouldn't advocate that, I think it
would be better than suppression, less destructive. But what you see we don't know is how to apply
a proper control to the transformation of human consciousness that are relatively easy.
Because we are not clear one of the reasons is we are not clear as to the role in life
of these chemicals nor are we clear as to the role of the physician.
This I want to consider. You know of course that in ancient times there was no clear distinction
between priest and physician. An individual might be primarily priest and secondarily a physician.
But in course of time the function of priest and the function of physician began to separate
and with the advent of scientific medicine because the development of the sciences was always
opposed by the church therefore priests tended not to practice scientific medicine and the
practitioners of scientific medicine being other than priests, the religious and the medical professions
separated. And in the development of medicine in the West, the deep concern of a physician
was to preserve people from death, to be a healer and the function of looking after death
was abandoned to the priest and the minister. So when the doctor in treating a patient gives up hope,
he is out of role, he doesn't know what to do beyond that point and therefore the priest is summoned.
So the work of a doctor is throughout curative, he is in all his activities opposed to death and
regards death as the enemy. This is of course not true of every individual physician. It is true
of medical ethics and of the generality of physicians. So that of course terminal cases are people
being tortured, beneficently yes with a good motive but nonetheless being tortured by being
kept alive in a state of near mummification. Because while there is life that is hope and in the
next few days there might be some amazing medical discovery which would cure them and it would have
been ashamed to let them die and not reap its benefits. Yes there always might be.
So the fact that the physician is in general out of role and does not know what to do in the face of death
has a very important connection with another aspect of the physician's trade that he does not
know what to do with chemicals or drugs which do not have the function of healing a physical disease.
In a way all consciousness expanding drugs have something to do with death. Why? Because
all spiritual disciplines are as young pointed out preparations for death.
It is a commonplace of these disciplines, spiritual disciplines that what you do in them is
die in the midst of life. You are born again a second time and that death refers to the death
of the ego that is to say you leave behind the state of consciousness in which you thought
you were no more than an isolated individual center of consciousness. That drops back and so
in that sense you have died and spiritual disciplines very often involve as an aid to that
the contemplation of death. We think it is rather foolish nowadays but monks used to keep
skulls on their desks. Buddhists meditate in graveyards. Hindu yogis meditate beside the burning
guts on the banks of the Ganges where they are always confronted with death. Knowing this is going
to happen to me. Good Jeff once said that if anything would possibly save mankind from its idiocy,
it would be the clearest possible recognition by every individual that he and all others around him
are most certainly going to die. Because this when it becomes something perfectly clear to you,
surprisingly becomes a source of intense joy and vitality because when you have accepted your own death
in the midst of life, it means that you let go of yourself and you are therefore free. You are
not any longer played by worry and anxiety. You know that you are done for anyhow. So there's no
need constantly to fight to protect yourself because what's the point and it isn't just you
see that people spend all their time really doing something to protect themselves, like say taking
out an insurance policy or seeing that they eat properly. It's the what we do that doesn't
issue in any action at all. The constant inner worry which leads to no action except more worry
and that is what is given up. You see by a person who really knows that he's dead. So do you see
that transcending yourself going on the on your ego is the great preparation for death?
Now then you see we come back to the medical profession. If this profession takes the side of the
ego against death, a poses death, regards death as the supreme evil, then the doctor really is out
of role at the bedside of a dying patient and he also is out of role when it comes to the handling
of drugs that are not designed to heal death bringing sicknesses as we ordinarily understand them.
But what happens? What happens? We actually very few people take priests seriously.
I mean even even church going Christians because this is what happens when somebody in the family
of a good Christian shows signs of mental derangement. The priest is a very seldom called in
one of the cause in a psychiatrist. Why? Because in our culture he's a scientist and the scientist
has a far greater reputation for magical power than a priest or minister. We only call in the priest
when all hope is abandoned. The scientist hasn't been able to work and say well maybe
proud to do some good. And the poor priest gets in there and our Catholic priest or Anglican
priests by a large, a very used to handling death. They know what to do. Come in and open the book
at the right place without any embarrassment, proceed to administer the last rights and it really
that's rather good. I mean here's a man who knows what to do and isn't flustered in the face of death
that in itself as a calming influence. But a lot of people feel that this isn't really the way to
handle it because they don't really dig or understand these last rights. And if the priest is
called in only in desperation, this argues that he doesn't have very much power anyway,
may have power to do something with the Lord in the world beyond but very doubtful in this world.
So on this up circumstance, he's both the priest and the physician and I'm referring
of course to the priest as he is found in the United States or in Europe in the present day,
they need to take another look at death. And to bring out the all important fact
that life without death has no value. Death, as Norman Brown pointed out in his book life against death,
death is what confers individuality upon us. It is your limits in time
that constitute you just as much as your limits in space. Death therefore always overshadows the
whole of life and life would have no meaning, no point if it didn't have death to balance it.
In breath and up breath coming and going arising and falling are mutually interdependent.
So death is a very valuable and very important thing which is being swept under the carpet.
So then, in a culture where priest and physician have become widely separated,
the sudden bursting upon us of sacramental substances is an embarrassment to both.
It is embarrassing first of all to the priest for many reasons, because supposing we were to say,
psychedelic substances are not the province of physicians and psychiatrists, they are the province
of the clergy. Everybody would start their hands over these people who have no scientific training.
They don't even think about neurology. They don't know anything about the subtle effects of these
things on the human organism. How could they be responsible? And a last, it's true. The clergy
have not had training in neurology and so much of the worst for them. On the other hand, the psychiatrists
who are very few exception and the neurologists have no no training in theology. And when they
most of them and they talk about theology, they reveal their abysmal ignorance of the whole matter.
So the thing absolutely fall back between two stools and there is no class of people, although
there are individuals, there is no accepted, there is no recognized class of people who might be
called, for example, theo botanists, or theo neurologists. And we very much need the development of such
a profession. And until we have it, we will be in a difficult situation as to how to deal
with drugs if you will or chemicals that do not seem to have as their primary use, the healing
of a physical disease. But there is a sense in which these substances are medicine rather than
diet. What is the difference between medicine and a diet? A medicine is something you need when
something is wrong. When something is out of order, a diet is what you live on permanently.
Of course, corrections in diet can have a medicinal effect. But surely, there is a very true sense
in which we can say that our world based on the ordinary egocentric consciousness is very seriously sick,
psychically sick. I'm not going to, you know, everybody knows why we can see it all around us,
but we are stuck staring, raving mad, and our busy preparing to destroy ourselves.
And that is a sickness which needs some kind of remedy and maybe even a desperate remedy.
The use of things that would lift us out of the egocentric situation could therefore be
medicine considered medical, as healing for a social disorder. But again, I would say that they
used in that way should be used as medicine in the sense that they don't become diet.
Because in my experience, and of course, in this matter, everybody speaks for themselves.
But say, I consider just myself alone. I wouldn't feel very put out if, say, LSD, what advantage
from the earth tomorrow. Because I have discovered that this is not the sort of thing. You
sort of take every so often like you go to church or if you do. But it's something that you can take
several times in a gradually diminishing quantity. And then you had it. Beyond that, it's up to you
to integrate your vision with everyday life and with all the various kinds of knowledge. That's
enough. But there are other people who seem to think that the great thing to do is to start out
with a little and then keep on going, making it bigger and bigger and bigger. As if they were looking
for something that should lie at the end of the line. And then it becomes a diet.
Now, that is indeed getting hooked on medicine. And doctors don't like to hook you on medicine
and then very rightly. Because the ideal of a good doctor is to get rid of you as a patient.
He doesn't want chronic patients. Poor people always hanging on to him, always rushing for help.
He wants to set you back on your own feet. And that is an excellent principle. This is where
the doctor really has something to say to the priest. Because priests tend by and large to want to
hook you. In other words, to keep you coming to church. So that you will pay your dues and the church
will prosper. So the more people they can get hooked on religion, the merrier. Now, priest in this
way ought to learn from the doctors and try and get rid of people by telling them their gospel
or whatever it is they have to say and say, now you had it go away. Because you see, if you do that,
you will create a vacuum and it will always be filled just as when the doctor, the faster a doctor
can get people out of his office. They go around and tell everybody this man could be. I didn't have
to go back to it. So more people will be coming in. There are always plenty and plenty of people
never come to an end. So in a way, the religious man ought to handle a huge turnover of people
coming through and going away, coming through and going away, then he's really working. But he should
not get them hooked on the medicine. Indeed, there is a famous Latin phrase, Crooks
Medichina Mundi, the cross, the medicine of the world. But people get hung up, you see, on the cross.
Jesus didn't hear him out. According to the Christian mythology, Jesus came alive again afterwards.
He didn't get hung up only for a while. And so in the same way, if Christians really believed in the
inner meaning of their doctrine, they wouldn't get hung up on the cross either, except temporarily.
I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live. So also when it comes to the use of any
technique whatsoever, whether it's yoga or LSD or what have you, for the spiritual awakening,
there applies to it the Buddha's symbol of the raft. The Buddha likened his method, his
Dharma, or doctrine, or method, to a raft. It's also called a Yana, or vehicle, hence the Mahayana,
the big vehicle, the Hina Yana, the little vehicle. And it takes you across the river of which this
shore is birth and death, and the other shore liberation, Nirvana. Now you get on that raft and you go
over, when you get to the other shore, you leave the raft behind. Same way, they say in Zen Buddhism,
their technique, the use of the Koran or meditation problem, is like knocking at a door with a brick.
When the door is opened, you don't carry the brick inside. You leave the brick behind.
So with all these things, they are means, who pire, and they have as their objective
deliverance from means. The Christian mystic speak of the highest state of contemplative prayer,
or union with God, as a union without means. And I would extend the sense of the word means,
even to ecstasy. In other words, ecstasy is in, invariably, in the great religious traditions,
not a final state. Ecstasy is an intermediate state. So, for example, in Zen,
when the experience of satari or awakening comes about, there is an ecstasy. You feel marvellous.
You feel as if you were walking on air. You feel absolutely unstructed. You feel as happy as a lock.
You feel, you know, this fantastic bang, it's marvellous. But that in itself is only incidental.
Zen saying says that monk who has a satari goes to hell as straight as an arrow.
In other words, to have it is to cling to it. And if you think that the ecstasy is the important thing,
it isn't. The ecstasy is an intermediate stage to bring you back to the point where you can see
that every day life that your ordinary mind, as they say in Zen, is the Buddha mind, that every day life
as it is, is the great thing. And there is no difference between that and the divine life.
So, this is why you should read, especially, there's a new little book out on Zen,
edited by Lucian Strich. What's the name of it, Jeno?
It's prayers, prayers, poems.
Yes, well, yes, this has got some very good things in it. About how the great masters
insist that for everything you seem to have attained, every great insight, every great ecstasy,
you must drop it, let go of it, and immediately go ahead. Because in the end, thank you.
If you think that here it is, Zen, poems, prayers, summons, anecdotes, interviews, by Lucian Strich
and Takashi Ikimoto. Very good. But they insist on the point that so long as you think
that there is a state of affairs in which you can say about the big thing, whether it's God,
whether it's Nirvana, Brahmam, the Divine, the Tao, I've got it. You haven't.
Because the moment you regard it as some sort of object, some sort of state, some sort of thing,
which you can lay your hands on, you've put it away from yourself.
See, the one thing you can't lay hands on is you. Never find it out. There are many years you can't
find out who it is that wants to find out. And who it is that wants to find out who it is that wants
to find out. Never get out of it. You see, but that's the thing. It's the thing that is most close to you
as Francis Thompson said, nearer, he's even breathing closer than hands and feet.
So what is absolutely central to you is what you can never make an object of knowledge.
And so when you finally get to the point that you don't have to have anything because you're
it and you don't even need to insist on yourself that you're it because you have to insist on that,
it means that you're doubted. In order to go around saying to yourself,
be still and know that I am God, something like that. That's for beginners. That's for beginners.
But when they really get to the end of it, there isn't a trace. See, no means are left. No methods,
no getting hold of it. No meditation, no LSD, no nothing. Because it's it just the way it is.
But before a person sees that, then means are used. Whether it be yoga, whether it be chemicals,
whether it be anything else. So let me sort of sum up.
In the last analysis, all spiritual awakening involves something beyond the will and the ego.
You cannot do it yourself. So it makes little difference. What you use for this,
some ways are easier than others. It's easier if you use Theo Botany, a divine plan.
And if you just bang your head against the brick wall, but with the very ease of it, there is the danger
that you may neglect the discipline that must go with it. In the banging your head against
the brick wall method, they are sure, at least that you know the discipline before anything happens.
And so that is the danger in a relatively easier way. But of course, as old as Huxley once said,
to insist upon using the more difficult ways to attain the mystical state. It's rather like
having to burn down your farmhouse every time you want rose pork.
The problem for us is that we don't have the split between the role of priest and the role of
physician has left both roles in poverty. And so there is nobody who is really competent to deal with
death or to deal with preparation for death. And that's what makes it a problem for us.
And finally, that the most subtle danger in all these things, whether it be yoga methods or whether
it be chemical methods, is fixation on ecstasy. Not to know how to go beyond ecstasy and beyond
looking at the divine as something that one can possess personally.
I was saying yesterday that psychedelic experiences tend to have two aspects. As a matter of fact,
you can classify their effects in many different ways. And people who say there are three things
to be remembered or four things to be remembered about so and so are really making this in order
to put a point across. You sort of classifications. There are always 530 things to be
remembered about anything. So don't take this too seriously, but I'm doing it to make a point.
And these two aspects are on the one hand, the alteration of sense perception.
And on the other hand, intuitive insight. And if we could say that the intuitive insight is the
aspect of psychedelic experience that corresponds most closely to the natural mystical experience,
which does not necessarily involve the types of sensory alteration or alteration of perception
so often involved with the chemicals. Nevertheless, it's hard to draw a very straight line between
these two aspects. Because every so often the sensory alterations suggest some kind of insight.
I first of all want to go into the nature of some of these alterations, typical alterations,
and discuss them. But first, you are aware, I suppose, that these chemicals are often classified
as hallucinogens. That is to say chemicals which generate hallucinations.
And this has seemed to me a very bad word indeed because, of course, hallucination always carries with
it some kind of condemnation. It's a figurative word. And I have rarely come across an instance
of where the use of LSD or mescaline or psilocybin has created a genuine hallucination.
For a hallucination is the appearance of something to a particular individual,
unseen by others, which he believes to be part of the real world. In other words, if you saw
ghost, it might be claimed that this was a hallucination. If you took the ghost, there's really
out there. But things like that don't tend to happen. What might be class to hallucinations
are of two kinds, visions seen with the eyes closed. But of course, you know that these are visions.
You know that you are under the influence of a brain altering chemical, and that therefore
unusual things are likely to happen, which you are not going to mistake for events in the
external world. And therefore, when you close your eyes and behold, the most amazing patterns
constructed out of jewels, moving with splendid order in the dark, or see infinite complexities of
ferns, where the stems sprout fronds, and the fronds sprout fronds, and the frondlets sprout frondlets,
and forever and forever, or marvelous arrangements of crystal arabesks, translucent,
colored balls moving in space in many dimensions. In enormous temples, vast architectural creations
with every kind of wall and tower and cauliflower, going on forever and ever through gigantic spaces,
getting involved in thistles, with prickles upon prickles forever and ever,
visions of Persian palaces, of courtyard, of arabesks, of dancing girls, and angels, and knights in
armour, all sorts of fantastic things will appear before closed eyes. But you know all the time,
that these are visions, and of course they create the most extraordinary questions. What are they?
Because although they are visionary, although they aren't there in the external world,
they very much are in the internal world, and they must have some kind of neurological basis.
What are we looking at when we see those things? This is a question which nobody knows how to answer.
For in some way there must be a physiological basis for this kind of patterning. Is it that we are
getting a glimpse of patterning processes within the brain? Processes which organize are ordinary
thinking about things. After all you know that when you use the telephone and you dial somebody,
there is a machinery which handles it all, but if you go and look at that machinery,
you'll find it has an extraordinarily interesting design. The patterns of electronic equipment are
sometimes very beautiful, but you're not aware of those patterns when you make telephone call.
You're aware of voices, and that's it, and bells ringing. So it may be in the same way that within
minds, our brains, there are perfectly marvelous pattern organizations which we become aware of
only under special circumstances. In other words, what one tends to do with under the influence of a
psychedelic chemical is to become aware of being aware. That is to say you turn your senses back
on themselves, and one is only inclined to do this when there is an alteration in the normal form
of perception. That is to say, in seeing you do not notice your eyes, in hearing you do not notice
your ears, especially if they're healthy, but if some disease should attack the eye or the ear
or some temporary inconvenience and you see spots in front of your eyes. You know that those spots
are within the structure of the eye, and if there is singing in your ear, you know that that
singing sound is within the structure of the ear, and this turns the sense upon the sense.
So an exactly the same way is something altered, your normal way of seeing things, your attention
is diverted from what you see to seeing itself. And this, of course, this awareness of awareness,
the turning you back upon yourself, even at this still rather superficial level, is the beginning
of a process of self-exploration and self-knowledge, but it takes the little alteration to do it.
As it were to fasten your interest, because when your eyes are seeing perfectly,
there is nothing to fasten on, you see, the eye creates a visual space of total clarity and
emptiness, although that's all inside your head. And you find it difficult to attend to that,
which has no distinctive features. But when an alteration is introduced, there is some new distinctive
feature to cite. But these are very hard to pin down. I gave you an illustration last night
of the feeling that everything is at a funny angle. When a picture, as I said, is out of alignment,
you know, it's wrong. It's queer. Now, supposing everything gets out of alignment.
And everything has a sense of being funny. I don't mean funny, I mean a bit funny queer.
Everything is just odd. Just a little bit odd. It's, if everybody had suddenly grown pointed
ears. And not only people, but everything has pointed ears on it. It will projectile sticking
up to these pointed ears. And you know, that's elephant. That's foxy. It's something, something funny.
And leaves on trees, something like all pointed ears. You see, we can get to this solid impression.
Very strange, very hard to pin down. So one of the first inquiries that is always interesting
in the psychedelic state is to discuss with yourself, what is the difference between this way of
seeing things and the normal way? And you can get a group of people sitting around and talking about that.
And it becomes one of the artist conversations, because people can't quite pin down what it is.
They're all agree. There's something funny. Everything's a little bit off and yet it looks the
same as it should look, but it's off. And what do we mean by that? We really don't know.
And it would be very difficult to establish a physiological basis for this. It might be done.
But you see, it's like, as in the same way, as when you put on colored glasses,
everything becomes colored with the color of the glass. And soon, your consciousness will start to
eliminate that effect. And it will begin after a while to look normal as it does when you wear sunglasses.
So in the same way, if you put on a glass, for every sense that you have. And the name of that glass is funny.
Everything will look funny. And so, but nevertheless, this discussion, what is the difference between
normal awareness and funny awareness? Focus is you on the whole thing of awareness, on the whole process,
which does not ordinarily happen. Unless you do meditation practices,
designed to do exactly that. So another thing that is comparable to this that happens is what I would
call the feeling that everything is significant. Now, this is a funny word, taken literally,
significant means something which serves as a sign, which signifies something other than itself.
I say, this is a very significant remark that you've made. Means that it has a deep meaning.
But there is another sense of significant, which means important.
And valuable, interesting, in that sense. Now, how can you possibly describe a state of mind
in which everything appears to be significant? Logically, this is absurd, just like everything being
off center, out of funny angle. But nevertheless, however absurd, it is logically,
it is nevertheless a characteristic of this state. For example, let's suppose somebody reads,
somebody sits down and reads poetry. Well, you see the meaning of the poetry in the ordinary way,
but you also see a lot more than you normally notice. That is to say, every tone and texture of the
reader's voice, every clearing of his throat, every pause to take a breath, every gesture
is integrated into the poem. It becomes important. It becomes significant. It is as if there
were some sort of signal system in the brain, which attaches cues to various experiences.
So that you know, for example, the difference between a direct experience and a memory.
Because some experiences have the here and now cue attached to them, as when you sit and look at
somebody, other experiences, as when you close your eyes and remember the face of the friend who's
not here, they have the memory cue attached to them. So you know that that's not here and now.
Well, so in a similar way, our experiences, we attach to them cues. Important, notice this.
There are other cues, unimportant, don't bother, or perhaps no cue at all.
Now here in this state of consciousness, everything gets cueed. Everything, everything you look at,
becomes important. And you realize that it's only an arbitrary kind of human scheme of selection.
That says these things are important and those are not. Because everything is important to
something. You then get this curious sense. You see that it doesn't really matter what you look at or
what you listen to. Anything will do. Only there does remain a residue of value judgment.
So that you're still capable of saying, I would rather look at this than at that. But if it so
happens that you just for the sake of experiment, choose to look at what Roger would rather not look at,
it in turn becomes absolutely fascinating. Among the other alterations, I've thought of quite a
number of them. I mentioned already the motion alteration, where the world seems to breathe,
where walls seem as if they were made of cloth with an electric fan behind so that they
they wave. Where the pile and a carpet, you look closely into it, every little bunch of threads
constituting pile can start to wiggle. Now, a similar to that is what I would call the experience
of grain in the senses. Once I was in this experiment and I was looking at the millions in windows,
like here, you see. And although I wasn't seeing any more millions than there actually are,
I wasn't seeing double. Nevertheless, the arrangement of one after another gave the impression of doubling.
It was like seeing double. And yet on account, I counted the same as a person in the ordinary
state of consciousness. But one seemed to be a replica of another, of another, of another.
And the same would be true in looking at any sort of regular pattern and a carpet or whatever.
And then the doctor said, look at your, hold up a finger and see if you see that double.
And no, I said, no, you're, oh, but yes. But what I had seen was that just beside my finger,
there was a whisp of cigarette smoke. And this whisp being just at the same height as the finger,
right here, became a basis for an identification image of a second finger.
In other words, just the same way as you work the raw shot plot into all sorts of shapes.
So I worked the raw shot plot of smoke in the air into a second finger behind the, beside the first.
And for a moment, it seemed just like it until I detected the source of the illusion.
This led to examination of stones.
And very quickly, I suddenly somehow got into the impression that the whole space of the visual field.
Seemed as if handfuls of petals had been thrown into it.
And the whole visual space was constructed out of ever so many interlacing concentric circles.
You know, for example, in the way that color pictures are sometimes reproduced.
There are several techniques, and they depend on the various kinds of screen that I used for printing.
Well, there is a type of screen that is made up of ever so many circular patterns,
all interlocking and intermeshing with each other.
And so the whole visual world seemed to be based on a screen or grid of this kind.
Now the interesting thing was that I could not at any point isolate actual lines in space,
forming this grid, which did not coincide with some ordinary sense perceived object.
In other words, there was nothing to be seen that would not ordinarily be seen.
And yet my eyes had organized what is ordinarily to be seen into this pattern of ever so many concentric circles.
It is as if in other words, when you listen to an alarm clock, you know the whole fashion
kind you go click block, younger is a click Block click block
and they don't they go click click click click click click click, tick click click, click click click click
click click click click click click the two here, click, clock or tick talk.
Because your mind resents the monotony of tick tick.
And then you know very afterwards you can rhyme dog roll to this clock.
And you can hear tunes in it. It becomes the beat and you fit tunes in with the beat and things
like that. Well, and just the same way that you do that. So your eyes can organize
what they see into patterns which we would say in the ordinary way aren't there.
They can pick out waves as I see a row of people sitting with their heads on top
but there's a thing like this. You see a rippling right so you will see.
And ever, ever so many things like that can be done.
And so you start when you see that asking questions.
What is the right way to organize the way you see the world?
Everybody running around and agreeing of course that they see the world the normal way in the proper way.
Yes, but is this actually so?
Draw it's an agreement. It's posing weird agreed to see it a different way.
See because the world, as I've often said, is essentially an enormous raw shock plot.
It's profoundly wiggly.
Any except in places where men have tried to straighten it out by building straight walls,
straight highways and so on, but the natural world is wiggly all the way through, including our own bodies.
Well, how are you going to interpret these wiggles?
How are you going to decide? How much of a wiggle constitutes one wiggle?
What is a unit of wiggle?
You see? So we apparently what has happened and the cost of men is sent many, many millennia.
Is that persuasive human beings have said, well, now look, this is the where it goes and everybody's got to agree with me.
Surely this is the where it goes and everybody says because this guy's kind of rough. Yes,
so that's right, that is the where it goes and so whether these people were powerful physically,
or powerful persuasively, we've all more or less agreed to see the world the same way,
although we have not agreed yet, you see to speak the same language.
We're still using an enormous number of different languages.
But these things, you see these organizing patterns which we project upon the world,
are as it were, the languages of another kind. They are patterning methods,
methods of thinking, structures of thinking, which we use to organize the external world in exactly the same way,
that one uses the string bag of longitudes and latitudes in which the world is hung,
to organize it, or the celestial latitudes and longitudes to organize the stars.
These webs, these grids are fundamental to organize thinking about the world.
Numbers, you see, are a similar kind of patterning and the mathematician knows all kinds of patterns,
latitudes, matrices, matrices, and so on, which can be used for organizing things.
So, the other aspect of this grain experience in the senses is what I would call a pointy
is a school of painting that was invented in France, especially associated with the name of Sierva,
where the painting is composed of my new dots in many colours.
And this is a very common psychedelic phenomenon, similar to the concentric circles that I just mentioned,
to see everything consisting of points. Once again, you are not able to specify
actually to put a needle point on any one of these points, and yet everything that you see,
the ordinary vision of the world seems to be made up of my new dots, and you begin to wonder,
I have you know that after all you have many nerve ends, all over your body, there are endings
of nerves, and these are especially sensitive in the retina. And you wonder, am I becoming aware
of the multiplicity of my nerve ends, of every single unit that picks up the external world,
and therefore I see in the external world a point corresponding to each one of my nerve ends that
picks it up? Well, it might be that. But as you think about that, you are liable to get fascinated
with the idea of one nerve end. One point, one as it were, basic unit of sensitivity.
And I have christened this basic unit, the eony weeny. The eony weeny is a fundamental,
you might say, unit of conscious life, sensitive life. And when you begin to think about this,
one unit of conscious life, the extraordinary things begin to happen. Because you realize,
well, we've got really down to simplicity now. We've got this, as it were, one fundamental point,
which is what is called in Hindu philosophy, a Bindu, B-I-N-D-U, Bindu, is an atom,
but not a physical atom in the sense of what our physicist means by an atom. This is an intellectual
atom. The finest that any grain can get. It's almost like the Euclidean point, having positioned,
but no magnitude, except that it isn't quite as abstract as that. The eony weeny is very much
alive. It is a unit of, and I use this word to indicate what is common to all senses.
A unit of sight, of sound, of touch, of taste, of smell. And all these senses, as you begin to
realize, with the psychedelics, are really one sense specialized in five different ways.
That's why you, in certain cases, hear colors, sea sounds, and so on. It all seems to go together.
Well, of course, it would, because they're all specializations of our basic sensitivity. All senses
are fundamentally a sort of touch. So the eony weeny is this fundamental unit of touch.
Now, as you know about a neuron, a neuron is such that it can give either yes or no as a message.
That is to say, either it fires or it doesn't. So then the eony weeny is like that.
It's either black or white, but you begin to see that it's both because black always involves white
and white always involves black. So this eony weeny is one but two-faced. Also, it's being one
implies all the others. One implies many, because you can't think one unless you can think many.
You can't think many unless you can think one. The concepts are inseparable. One doesn't mean anything,
unless you know what many is. Many doesn't mean anything, unless you know what one is.
So suddenly the eony weeny, being one implies all the others and being itself, it implies an outside,
which is not itself. But if you can't have the outside without the inside. In other words, if you can't have
the space around the eony weeny without the eony weeny, and you can't have the eony weeny without the space,
then somehow it's very difficult to say that the eony weeny with the one little unit,
and everything else are different. They're not. They go together.
And this leads you into the most fascinating of all aspects of psychedelic experience,
which I will call the experience of relativity.
This gets us back to significance. What is important?
Now we human beings think we're important, and that we have a very complex civilisation,
that our libraries, our cities, our organisations, our institutions, our nations,
our wonders of religion and philosophy and art and architecture, and so on,
is the most complicated and the most significant thing that ever existed on earth.
And when we look at and realize that there are little cells in our bodies that have a sort of
independent civic life, and that there are all kinds of microorganisms, which when we see them,
we don't see the familiar human shape. We see something more or less globular.
We say, well, that's a very primitive shape compared with the shape of man.
It doesn't have us highly organised nervous system as ours, and therefore is obviously an inferior
creature. But with the psychedelic use, you have time to think about things, you don't
ordinarily think about. So, ah, not so hard, not so hard. How do you know this thing isn't
this complicated as you are? You haven't really looked. Start looking.
And we know a scientist can start looking, and he can find that one small,
tiny microorganism is very complicated indeed, and why wouldn't it be that from the point of view
of this microorganism? It's affairs are extraordinarily complex and very important.
I mean, imagine just something that we know a lot about, it's a long way from microorganism,
it's considered a B. What do B's know about subtle distinctions between different kinds of
honey that we've never thought of? Supposing a B is arranged, that it does exactly what it likes,
and yet at the same time, this is always socially acceptable. It's a pretty groovy sort of civilisation
there, wouldn't it be? You never have to stop to think with this offend anybody or anything like that.
You do just what you feel like doing, and it's everybody accepts it, it's perfectly fine.
You play the rules automatically. Well, human beings would say, that's not much of a challenge,
after all. It's a, man, it's more significant if you could do something wrong, if you could make a mistake.
Well, that's our way of thinking of it, that's our particular taste,
that we think it's more fun to play it, that way they may think it's more fun to play it the other way.
They say, well, why don't you want to introduce all that nonsense for? When you can live a perfectly
satisfactory life like a B, why do you want to go and bring in a kind of principle of evil choice
just to make everything messy? Well, it's another form of game, you know? Every game has some kind of a
a forfeit in it. You've got to lose something in order to find it or to win it back.
Now, that's the essence of a game, that's why you shuffle the deck of cards at the beginning to create chaos.
So, and then you work against it, you see? So, everybody has something that's a some kind of thing
that's the forfeit to play their life game. Otherwise, it'd be no game, you see?
We think it's important to survive. Well, it isn't. But we say so, you see?
It doesn't make the slightest difference, whether you live a short time or whether you live a long time.
After all, here are these fruit flies, just off of them.
They come and go, come and go, come and go with extraordinary repetitive,
generation after generation, in a few days. But for their point of view, this is perfectly
satisfactory, normal life. Because I think the same about myself. And if I cannot assume similar
processes in other creatures which are going on in me, then I'm reduced to turtle solipsism.
That is to say, there are people who argue that although you can learn Chinese,
you'll never, however much you study Chinese, and however much you speak with Chinese people,
you will never do anything really that understands Chinese because you weren't born with it.
You're always translating it into English. And so, you're permanently precluded from understanding
another culture. Well, you can carry that argument right down to understanding another person of your
own culture. And say, well, he's another person, and you never really know another person.
So we all are broken up into island universes, which have no real communication between each other at all.
Well, the only reason I reject that is that it affords that that basis
is a game rule which has very little play in it. In other words, it's like it's as boring as
tossing to see whether it will be heads or tails. But the assumption that other people,
another culture really can be understood, and that the further assumption that things that are
not human, that maybe insects or mammals or fish, are also are highly civilized,
is far more interesting assumption than that they're merely creatures of no importance.
But so you see that though that it is an assumption that we ought to go on living
and that it's a meaningless assumption when you really examine it. Because mere going on,
mere quantitative length of time is just so much time. It has no special qualitative meaning to it.
So we say the person died a glorious death. He died for some great cause, you see. And
womb he went out, you see. But we say that thing that went on for a few minutes,
short life he was the young man. He went up in a bang, but it was a glorious explosion and
everybody builds monuments to him and says he was a great man. So there is a value then
to the short and explosive as well as to the long and dull rock kind of a scene.
But when you're really fixed on a game rule, you see, like you ought to go on living.
It's very, very difficult indeed to see that you really don't have to.
To see, in other words, what this so often comes down to, this relativity.
Well let me postpone that for a moment. I want to further the idea of relativity. So what you see
then is that at every level of being, all creatures are confronted with the same tasks
and have the same problems. And are really in the same situation.
The infinitely small is as big as the big can be and the big is as small as the small can be.
Because after all when you get down, down, down, down to the most minute things you can
conceive. It turns out that they are surrounded with spaces that are relatively as vast as the
spaces between the bodies of the solar system or between the different galaxies on the large scale.
So if there are beings of any kind of sensitivity dwelling on these minute points of whatever,
they will look out and what we see as galaxies will not be visible to them at all.
They will find themselves in the same sort of universe we find ourselves in.
Because the kind that you see every creature that is sensitive finds itself in the middle.
See each one of you is in the middle of the world. Because you radiate a sensitivity.
In other words, the extent to which your eyes will see your ears will pick up sound
is always a circle, or a sphere.
And you can expand that sphere by instruments, telescopes, and radio astronomy or whatever it may be,
telephones, but still you are in the middle.
That's the most important place. Everybody is in the most important place.
The middle. And we say man is the measure of all things.
It's a funny feeling that man stands in the middle. Of course he does.
He knows as it were so much higher than himself and so much lower than himself.
Probably equal in both directions. So much bigger, so much little.
So when you get down to very tiny,
that thing to feels in the same place that you do.
But you might say oh well but really it's very tiny. Because after all we are fairly tiny.
And then maybe in other words beyond all the galaxies that we are aware of,
vast systems that we have never knowledge of at all, and they are after all bigger.
Are they? Are you sure?
Bigger? Or are they just the same place?
You see? Essentially you can construct a scheme where you get bigger and bigger and bigger.
And that bigger is the same place as the tiniest.
Because around in the circle,
that's you might say at first, the difficult to think about,
that it is perfectly logical concept. Perfect is simple, only it's unfamiliar.
So as the sense, as this grows, you realise that everything is in the same position.
I remember I was thinking about this once and at the same time listening to Hindu music.
And the concept of this immense relativity was really moving in me, and I was full of marvel at it,
and it was somewhat terrifying. So how the Hindu music is a very Hindu music is very deep stuff.
You have to have quite a trained ear to go and see that it is something just as profound as anything
written by Bach or Beethoven. But I suddenly said, you know there are moments in this music when God
himself calls out for help. I don't know what I meant by that, but something like this.
In the Hindu philosophy, as you know, they believe that God plays high and seek with himself
and that he, as far as it will half the time, whatever time is, anywhere half of it.
He gets lost deliberately and forgets that he's gone.
And he gets as lost as lost can get, you know, which is the end of experience that we call the screaming
memes. And that's when God calls out for help. Immediately answers of course because he wakes up and finds out
we really is. But what you begin to see through this relativity thing, that everything is central.
Everything is important as everything else. However big, however little, you realize it's all
God in the same position. But now that begins to scare you because you say, well, I can't believe that
I am God. That would surely be very blessed because I thought I'm not very good and God's supposed to be good.
And I am not very powerful and God is supposed to be all powerful.
And you think, what do you mean you're not powerful?
This isn't a question of whether you're powerful or not powerful.
Powerful and impotent are just two opposites of the same game. If you didn't feel some lack of power,
you wouldn't feel any power. I mean, you couldn't be all powerful because that would mean nothing.
There would be just nothing happening. You were all powerful. But it would mean power and impotence
to be able and not to be able. Our two phases of the same thing.
So in the same way is the voluntary, what I can do and the involuntary, what I can to account,
help doing. They are phases of the same. You wouldn't know one without the other.
And you begin to see, oh, yeah, isn't that fascinating? And then in a funny way, you begin to realize
it's a sort of secret that you are willing what happens to you without your will.
Because you see that you couldn't will anything unless there was also that
that was other that you couldn't will that was beyond your control.
And it begins to dawn. You begin to see the whole thing that you're not just something fighting the
world or on your little lonesome. But the whole thing that you think you're fighting is the other side of you.
And the whole game is to make it seem as other and as strange as possible.
It's firm because that's getting way out. That's that's making excitement.
And you say, well, now why then can't I just switch it off? We couldn't I suddenly realize
bang like this, sitting here that all that I is other than me, all that I don't will,
is really me. Why can't I just do that? See, I only ask you, you think you can't because you think
about it superficially. Would you want to? Would you want the disintegration of the other?
And find out it's it's merely you in the sense of your ego. The self has to contain something
more complex than merely ego. It has to have an element in it which seems to resist.
See, when you move your arm like this, you have here what are called antagonistic muscles.
And dependent on these is motion. I prefer to call them complementary muscles but still they are
called antagonistic. It's all right. So when this muscle contracts when the bicep contracts,
this one relaxes. And so the opposite way when you do this, now you see they play with each other
against each other. And so they make a movement possible. So it is with involuntary of the involuntary
of the power and the non-power, where I conquer and where I surrender. See, do you get this feeling now?
See, you see, you see, I played it all the way through everything, every creature, every center
sensitivity, every eerie weening in the world is the same one. Now all in the same position,
but the whole thing is to look as if they weren't. Because that's the hiding part of the game,
the concealing part. So that every single eerie or human being or whatever you want in a unit of
sensitivity. However you want to measure it. Looks down and looks up and says, well,
those things aren't me. They're weird. They're very different. And especially I don't like spiders
or snakes or whatever it is that you don't like. And no, no, that's not human. And we talk about
snakes' eyes, you know, they have no warmth in them. What do you think? All eyes look like
to a snake. Oh, she said, what about the teeth of a gorgeous girl, look to an Easter?
So, then you realize, you see, that the whole point of it is that those things
have to look different. That's the whole point that if you didn't feel, they were not human.
They were something else. You wouldn't know you were human. And so they on their side,
look at you. And you, as a human being, have some claim, although it's probably merely relative,
to be the most predatory monster on earth. Because of the fish stay in the sea, the birds
pretty much stay in air, but human beings reigns through air and ocean and everything after their prey.
I mean it's both in the sharks could walk. So, when all is starts in, you begin to experience
an extraordinary kinship with all other forms of life, not only kinship with insects and worms
and bacteria and so on. But also with people, because you begin to see that everybody is faced
to the same problem you are. Everybody has the same death problem. And that everybody's
working aren't to be easily dismissed as good and bad and say, well, that's good and that's bad
and therefore I can feel. Well, what's the point of all this judgment as a matter of fact?
People judge despite the fact that Jesus said judgment not that you be not judged. But what's the
point of it all? Well, the point of it all is so that I feel that I'm right. See, because you can
despise other people in certain ways or other classes of people and say, well, they're
that terrible. But you wouldn't know, you were in the right unless you had all those terrible
people around you. I was talking in a previous seminar about in groups and just for those of
you who weren't here, I'll say briefly, everybody's trying to get themselves into an in group. That
is to say to be nice people and everybody who does constitute an in group thinks that they're
the nice people and that the outside, as even though they belong to a very fancy in group,
are all nasty people. See? And so, if you're in a given American town, say,
belong to live on the right side of the tracks and you're the nice people. And then there
are all those guns and niggas and whatever Mexicans over there and you say, ah, and they on their
hands say, gee, we really live a real life because we have to face poverty, we have to, we are
right down close to the bone and here, although it's rough, the meat is sweet and those people don't
know it, those wretched, they're all big buses and they own all the land and they own all
a property and they're a worthless bunch of junk, they're not even Christians. And, ah,
ah, they are the one, anything to do with them. And so, they feel they're the real in group,
you see? But neither one can know it is the real in group without the contrast of the other.
See? You'll depend on people who you could look down on in order to be able to feel up.
And so, you should recognize this and say, thank you very much for giving me the privilege
of being an in group because without you, ah, I wouldn't know where I was. And so, you see
all these human games running together and you begin to feel, gee, isn't that marvelous?
You know, first it starts being a kind of cynical. You see, everybody's out after himself
and that some people are very loving and very cooperative because they've realized that this
pays, that this makes other people love them and that they're playing a game, just like the
people who are hostile and grumpy and aggressive and rude and they get their way that way.
You will see everybody's playing the game, being selfish. And the first this gives you the
heart. See, ah, we all after all, nothing but little horrible island cells, each one out for itself.
And as this becomes very uncomfortable. If you've got to, you know, if you've been brought up
with a Christian conscience, then you begin to see, what is it that you're being selfish about?
What is it that you love when you say, I love myself?
Well, this becomes exceedingly puzzling. You realize that what you love when you love yourself
is always some other object than yourself. You like eating ice cream, you like
beautiful views, you like your house, you like your friends, you like kissing beautiful girls,
you like this, but it's all not me. See, you suddenly realize you can't separate yourself
that you love from everything. They'll search yourself in plies. Then, you know, you'll be
going to wonder which end is up, but it soon clarifies. And you suddenly see the whole thing,
and this can become with the psychedelics, a very, very vivid thing. The whole universe is a colossal
energy play, going this way, in that way, totally indestructible. And it's all you, and you didn't know
it, but that means you're the only one. This thing proliferates in millions and millions of
centers, but it's all one center. And you can get the physical sensation of the thing being,
and enormous, as it were, sort of, center of light, of joyous, wooping, glorious, loving,
bombed like that. And this will only usually last for a few moments, where you feel you've actually
put your finger on the center of reality. And it's this tremendous luminous energy.
Just beautiful. And then, as this passes off, you see, as it were, the reflected
glory of this in everything you look at. And at that moment, you see, in the experience, you're
beginning to come down. And as you look bored and more, you see, of course,
I don't object to being in a different state of consciousness than what I've just been in,
go back to being ordinary. Because now I've seen what ordinary consciousness is underneath.
It's this fantastic game of hide and seek. And it perfectly all right to come back,
because actually, since all is one, there is no difference between my perfectly everyday existence.
And this dependous vision of glory that I've just seen, because the one implies the other,
they go together. This is the game, this is the hide and seek. And so you can come back into an
extremely integrated, restful, quiet sense of peace. Never forgetting that you have seen relativity,
and that relativity is the key to the fundamental unity, because that which is related,
all extremes are related to each other. In a polar way, they are not things that are separate
from each other. As if they opposing forces of light and darkness came from such opposite ends of
the cosmos that there wasn't even a joining point between them and met in a clash. It is rather
that as a flower expands from a center and blossoms, you could draw diameters across it,
picking out opposite petals, but they all come from the same center.
I have left around a number of what I would call psychedelic books.
Which you will notice consists very largely of photographs of pattern in nature.
Crystal structures, shells, bone structures, leaf structures, and emalkials, erosion patterns,
patterns in marble, all kinds of pattern in nature. Because for some reason or other,
the strongest one of the strongest effects that I had from the use of psychedelics
was a vastly renewed appreciation of this dimension of the natural world, a kind of perception
that the whole world is pattern. This is a very strange feeling because our common sense,
normally, basis the world on substance. We think of an primordial and more or less solid stuff,
which is found in dense forms as in granite or a ball of steel, and found in very refined forms,
such as a gas, and we think that all the world is shapes of forms of this primordial stuff.
But one of the extraordinary consequences of using psychedelics is that everything suddenly turns
into transparency. I think that's what some physicists have tried to say,
I'm thinking of Arthur Eddington in particular, when he remarks that it seems to turn out
that the stuff of the world is the same as the stuff of our consciousness.
As if awareness itself and material substance were really not different, and whatever this
means scientifically, the psychological implication of it is somehow to make the physical world
light lighter, in every sense, somehow less heavy less burdensome, and lighter in the sense
of more permeated with light. If you look, for example, at those reproductions of
person ministers that I brought out, you will see what I mean by the vision of the world as being
lit interiorly illuminated from within. But the interesting thing about this from a scientific
point of view is that the physical description of the world does not require the concept of substance.
It requires only the concept of pattern, because upon physical analysis, all substances,
however, solid are finally described in terms of patterns, the patterns of their molecules,
atoms, electrons, and so forth, and it is always the description of the pattern that seems to count.
Common sense seems to urge us to ask the question, but what's the pattern made of?
In other words, if we see everything reduced to a lot of circles or winding lines,
we want to know what are those lines made of, but when you think it through the only way anybody
can ever tell you about them, is to describe still smaller patterns within them.
Nobody can really think of a way of talking about stuff, because if it has no pattern and is just
sort of homogeneous all the way through and has really no shape in itself, I can't imagine a
way of talking about it, but you can number and describe and make out delineate patterns.
And so the world takes on from this point of view what I would best call a musical quality.
Music having the peculiarity of being a language, a form of art, in which the principle delight
is pattern, and the whole meaning is in the pattern. Music, you see, really doesn't mean anything at all.
It's a great art, but one can have the absolutely magnificent music, which represents nothing
and describes nothing, one enjoys it simply for itself. In the same way as you might enjoy fireworks,
or watching ripples on water, or watching the shapes of clouds, they don't mean anything,
and yet they're orderly. And so one becomes peculiarly aware of this world as play.
I have described an experience in the joyous cosmology, which was actually based on an experiment
with the Mexican mushrooms, with Sala Sibin, in which I was listening to some Hindu music at the time,
in which the players were doing nothing, but vocalizing the rhythm of drums.
And they have a way of doing it with the syllables, ditta, ditta, ditta, ditta, ditta, ditta,
so on. And they get up to a tremendous speed, saying this, and it was the most gorgeous battle.
And then they were playing these various instruments, and all the sounds became, I became peculiarly
aware of the nonsense in them. There was, for example, an obo sound, which sounds like somebody singing
with his nose pinched. And now the Sala Siam, children love to do that, it makes a fascinating
noise. Why is it fascinating? Heaven only knows that in this sort of black, black, black, black,
Sala Siam, but they weave together with incredible skill. They have Hindu music involves the most
complex orders of pattern, and to count it out is quite difficult, but they do it with
consummate skill, especially with drums. And as a result of listening to this, everything became
that, everything became Hindu music. And so people, you see, when we listen to our own music,
well, that's very serious, and we take it off a granted, it's a violin, and this is a piano,
and these seem to be very normal noises. And we've so long been accustomed to them that we take them
for granted, and we think that they're perfectly sensible. Whereas, of course, if you listen to it
with new ears, they're nothing of the kind. We can take it an organ, for example, with a monstrous
construction of pipes, and playing all these sounds through them, blowing through holes,
simplifacinating. But when you hear the Hindus, who do things musically,
that at first sight strike us as ridiculous, because they concentrate on using sounds that we avoid,
but we do sometimes use those sounds when we are, especially as children, are trying to see what
funny noises we can make. And so, they will do things with their voices, that sound to us,
like some sort of clowning. But to them, of course, this is all perfectly normal in serious music.
Unless, of course, they are turned on when they're listening, as they very often are, in India.
And it's perfectly legitimate there. The thing that they did, they forbid is alcohol.
It's difficult to get in India. But they don't forbid bang. I remember I was
having dinner in Kyoto with a Buddhist priest and a little party. And naturally, or Japanese,
including Buddhist priests, drinkers, and he passed around there in Sake, in fairly
plentiful quantities. And sitting at the table, I Hindu, man, very intelligent fellow,
and I noticed he refused them. So a little later, I said to him, do you not drink for religious
reasons? He said, oh, no, it is not that. It is just that I don't need it, and I don't want to
come of myself with just something I don't need. I said, do you drink bang, bang? Oh, yes, he said,
you would like it, it is a very good drink. And as you know, a bang is an infusion of Kanova's
Indica. And so I suppose the Hindus, here there are music from that point of view very frequently.
Kanova's his hemp. Volgalinana's part. But the impression, you see, of this music at the time,
and in the state of mind I was in, in becoming the music and becoming a sort of marvelous nonsense.
Everything became that. And so I could see life behaving as patterns do so often behave.
Look at a tree. You see, first of all, the heavy outline of the trunk.
Then the trunk gives birth to branches. And the branches give birth to twigs. And the twigs give birth to
leaves. And the leaves give birth to hairs and veins. And if you go on looking with a microscope,
there is wiggle after wiggle after wiggle after wiggle, all coming out and yet all adding up
to the perfection of this tree's pattern, like some sort of symphony. And so I could see all
the wiggles and patterns of human imagination and behavior as being involved in this.
And the things that we call good as well as the things that we call bad. The things that we call
healthy as well as the things that we call sick. The enlightened and illuminated and liberated point of view
as well as the egocentric and point of view in bondage. All of them as being integral parts of this
terrific playfulness, which the Hindus call the Lila or sport of creation, or better play,
better than sport. Play in the sense of playing the piano. Playing the drama and so on.
Not play in the sense of the trivial. So it was an almost astounding feeling of being entirely a pattern.
And nobody was making the pattern. There wasn't a pattern outside the pattern. The pattern itself was it.
It grew itself. It created itself. It was spontaneous. It was all there was. And what a... what a
wasness. And so one is constantly reminded of this by all natural forms and objects in which
pattern is very apparent and in which at the same time transparency is apparent. These two aesthetic
qualities go together to be suggestive of the psychedelic experience. And so it seems more than ever
natural to surround oneself with not only the objects of human art but with dried flowers and herbs
and grasses and seashells and various kinds of rocks and crystals. And I know a very great sculptor
and no, she's not a sculptor. She's really a mosaic artist and painter. Her name is Louisa Jenkins.
And she is a great admirer of Talha Dishardna, the very progressive Jesuit theologian. She is a Catholic.
And she has caught this feeling of universal pattern from him and her studio is an absolute
wonder museum. And she sees the artistic significance of everything. For example, we were having dinner
with her one evening and she was serving Japanese sake in those small cups. Her cups were white.
And one of them dropped off the table and split in two. And we were about to pick it up and throw it away.
She said, oh don't throw that away. It said, I have a use for it. And a little later she presented
me, it's hanging in the dining room there, with an amazing face made of a flat disc of cement.
And the sake cups had been turned upside down and used as the eyelids for this creature.
Well, the thing is that her whole studio contains, she's painted this, this is Leviathan the
monster of the deep. Her whole studio contains things like skeleton leaves, feathers of the most
intricate type, fish skeletons, animals bones, marvelous pieces of driftwood, gorgeous blocks of
quartz, everything that is absolutely fascinating. A child would go out of its head in that studio.
But somehow this intimates a world which is entirely designed pattern and it has an extraordinary
levity and joyousness to it. It seems to be a world that is immaterial in the double sense of the fact
that it is not material and that it doesn't matter in the sense of when something matters that
it is grave and thus heavy. It becomes in other words a universe whose whole meaning is playfulness.
But playfulness must in order to succeed must have an aspect which simulates tragedy.
And can play at not play so that one can realize play. It is fundamentally play but it plays
very serious games or plays at seriousness. Now this leads me to a question that is important
about the use of psychedelics. All the people who have been involved with it talk about games.
Game theory is very fundamental to it. Now when Timothy Leary and Richard Albert were at Harvard,
both of them started out in their work as very very respectable scientists in psychology. They knew
all about statistics and Timothy Leary while he had been here at Berkeley had done some very careful
statistical analysis of psychological mechanisms and so on and got his doctorate and was a very
respected scientist. Then they began working with psilocybin. Well they made what was to their
colleagues the fatal mistake and not just of experimenting on subjects and making careful notes
and analysis of how they reacted but they took it themselves. And then they slowly began
to realize that what is called serious scientific inquiry is a kind of game and you can see it
as that of course without being under the influence of the psychedelic. Just by reading some
of the literature especially of the social sciences where you will find amazing jargons are used
and that you have to be able to speak that jargon in order to belong to the academic fraternity.
If you don't talk that way and if you don't acquire the special rituals of the fraternity,
you are not one of the boys and an enormous amount of these investigations are truly trivial.
I remember for a time I was associated with a certain university which has a famous department of
education that's in this state and I remember reading the subjects of master's dissertations
when the degrees were awarded at commencement and what they had done is he was to choose
subjects about running schools which were as specialized as you could get.
I mean somebody got his master's thesis from writing about the relationship of windows
in a classroom to the circulation of air for the children. Now this is fundamentally a job for
constructor or architect or someone I mean you know and but this qualifies one for a master's degree
in education is simply fantastic but all those sciences and this is a particularly true of the
study of English. They want to become scientific and that means studying something minutely
well it's very important sometimes for physicists or a chemist to study something extremely
minutely but what these other people are doing because that the physicist and the chemist
of a quieter certain power and status through their studies they are simply trying to copy the method
of doing things in spheres where this method is not particularly applicable and so it becomes
strictly again especially in psychology where anything that is studied has more variables in
it than anyone can think about and so but it does make a very very pretentious thesis to put
forward some really good psychological statistics so I shall have more to say about psychological
statistics in a few minutes but so it becomes a game of staying in a certain cast well they
saw through this you see and they felt at once that it was really rather ridiculous that they
were doing this game in the psychology department at Harvard University and all as they ought
to be mumbling in their beards and looking very grave so the funny thing was the university couldn't
stand it and there was a question as to whether they were resigned or fired it was probably
both but they just couldn't go on with it but now then it followed from that that they had
to react to the opposite extreme and play another game altogether which was of course what game
is the the opposite of the academic game is obviously the beatenic game which is another game too
because that too has its uniform its rituals its language everything and the moment you begin
talking that way you align yourself with a certain in group I mean if you dig things instead of
appreciating them that puts you in a certain thing because they have their in group language
just as the academic people do at all games well now the problem becomes this there is a danger
when you see how gaming life is two of overtly to regard everybody as playing games
so that when somebody says something to you which is supposed to be either serious or sincere
the two things are not the same you treat it as a game gambit and a person who is by no means
ready to admit that he's playing games is very very put off with us because you say you don't
take me seriously or treating me as just as if I were playing games and so too when people get
swept away by the notion that everything everybody is playing games they're also liable to get
what has been called the holy man syndrome which is I am divine and therefore I am above
right and wrong I can do anything I please because after all it's only a game and this is one of
the things that in what I would call imbalanced people is very liable indeed to result from the
use of psychedelics and one of the reasons why society is afraid of it and this really does
present a considerable problem of course we can look to the experience of the past to give us a
bit of help in us because in Asia there have of course for centuries been people who attain the
state of consciousness involving the point of view a that the world is a game and that it is
fundamentally harmonious and that good and evil are ultimately reconciled. Johnson says in his book
those who would have good government without its opposite misrule do not understand the great principles
of the universe one might as well talk about having the positive principle without the negative
principle and such people are therefore either naves or fools. Pretty ball statement but nevertheless
the great Taoist sages and the Buddhist masters have always known very well indeed how to handle
themselves in terms of a relationship to ordinary society and have known how to take their holiness
lightly and if one has to have a halo how to wear it over one ear.
The if you if you consult for example the literature of Zen and if you know anything about
the way Zen is carried on here you find an astounding ability of the great men to carry their
exalted spiritual state in a very human way. One of the great points of Zen is that its ideal
is not to become a superman only a man a human and so the the Zen people do not
aspire to any claim of superhumanity and the last thing that they learn in their very long training
say of a person who is going to teach Zen is you might think it would be the first thing but it
is the last thing the last thing is they learn is the Zen interpretation of moral precepts
comes right at the end if you read this new book by Mura and Sasaki called the Zen Cohen
which is just published there is by Mura discusses the all the stages of Cohen study and right
at the end comes the the study of the precepts the irritating thing about this book is that it
doesn't tell you anything it tells you a lot of headings but no content and one sometimes
wishes that they would either put up or shut up but it does have in its marvelous translations
of Zen poems which are well worth the price of the book but anyway this this thing this point
does come out that it is all part of making a bridge between deep inside and the everyday life
of the world just as I said you can't go off into ecstasy or at least you can but it isn't a
good idea to go off into ecstasy and not grounded so in just the same way it is not a good
idea to go off into a state of god of nippotence and divine holiness etc and not bring it down to earth
and this is one of the things that I could really complain about among many people who have
taken a great deal of psychedelic substances there is this tendency to poo poo everything for example
I mean to do absolutely outrageous things there is a movement a foot called a neo-American church
to put the whole thing on a religious basis but what do you suppose they do they have a number
of what you might call elders of this church but they call each one a boohoo
VWHW a boohoo well I mean some people just going out of their way to make themselves ridiculous
it is this is the Revolution Museum and for some people are fired with the real Revolutionary
spirit that we are going to make this thing work we are going to turn the world on and but we are
going to do it on our terms cost you can see from the standpoint of deep insight that it's a very
cute idea to call a religious patriarchy boohoo I don't know what boohoo always means in
American slang in my slang it means a crybaby or it means something it could mean
sort of a hot air bag and truths and masters in their private references to each other refer to
one another as rice bags and tramps and bumps and all sorts of things but outwardly so far as
their contact with the world is concerned they where the proper and dignified we know the
garments of high officials which they're expected to wear because people want someone who is in a
position of great authority or responsibility to look like it so the Pope is the only man you can't
slap on the back and call Harry so it is of the essence of real insight that when you arrive
at the point of understanding what for one of the better term I must call the total harmony of the
world you have to see that in this scheme of things there really is no person who is superior
or inferior in the final sense of this of this word that is to say it becomes apparent
that everybody at his level and in his place is manifesting the divine just as much as you are
or as much as any Buddha is this is why it's said in the Buddhist scriptures
that when you become a Buddha everybody else does
and so you have no basis for giving yourself airs and graces or for breaking other people's
game rules in such a way as to cause hostility because they in their way playing their games
even if they are limited games even if they're bad games they too are all one with you
and they're not knowing that they're enlightened is at the point where they are very important indeed
it seems sometimes that events could be put on different levels and the levels could be numbered
and a level that occurred on number 23 where it was quite right would seem very wrong if
it occurred at level 95 but what happens to us often is that we see an event and think it's at
level 95 when it's really only at 23 and so it seems out of place and it seems quite wrong
so this sensation this real thorough absorption of the point that from the situation
of the deepest mystical union from that standpoint at that standpoint
or men are equal or beings are equal the problem arises when you try to bring that standpoint
into practical affairs you can make one of two mistakes one by saying you are all equal but
I am more equal than the rest of you because I know you're all equal and you're done
the other is the more common one all men are equally inferior
this is of course is the one from which our culture suffers to a high degree this is what is
the results in what you might call a sort of travesty of democracy you see all democratic thinking
in the western tradition was based on German mysticism the great tide of democracy came from
people inspired by tala and ekhat and suzo and rhizbrook the brothers of the free spirit the
anabaptists the levelers all those people were the seedbed of democratic ideas and the idea of
liberty the mystid their mysticism influenced George Fox and the Quakers but when you translate this
all men are equal in the sight of god to all men are equal on the level of politics and economics
then the parody is they're all equally inferior and this is why it issued in the various
fashions in the west for explaining greatness away as neurosis of psychoanalyzing all great saints and
the artists and so on and reducing their accomplishments to frustrations in sex and toiletry
this gave everybody you see who was really some kind of a bum a sense of satisfaction
in knowing that the great are after all justice inferior as you are that is a democracy at its worst
what has to be understood I think is this in order to integrate the level of mystical understanding
with practical life you have to remember one of the famous stories of Sri Ramakrishna
there was a student who had been with him and had been learning that all things in the world
are Brahman are the supreme manifestations of the divine and having heard this he left the masters
are Shram and went walking down the road and there comes a long an elephant swinging its
trunk and looking rather fierce and there is a Mahoot riding on the elephant and he says to this man
hey get out of the way this is a fierce elephant but he thought I am Brahman elephant is Brahman
we are all one godhead and no trouble can come so he didn't get out and as he approached the elephant
swatted him with his trunk and threw him into the Bramble bushes at the side of the road from which
he eventually extracted himself bleeding and bruised and he went back to the master and said and told
what had happened and the master shook his head and said to him but you should have realized that
the Mahoot warning you was also Brahman well so it is like this when you see that all different
people whatsoever whether they be high or whether they be low are manifesting the divine
just as much as you are supposing you are in a high situation you know you've really seen the
mystery and you see that all people manifested you must stop to consider that what also manifested
is the differences between them that they are arranged in a certain hierarchy that the king
being king and the cobbler being cobbler they are but you see if we these are like these levels
I was just talking about level 23 and 95 the cobbler at level 23 is doing all right
but what he is doing would not be appropriate at level 95 or however you want a number it
will turn it around so when we equalize things we must also take into account
everything that is there to be equalized put it in another way you might say if I really understand
that all is the work of the divine would I should I or should I not be angry when somebody
like Hitler destroys millions of Jewish people and many people jump swiftly to the conclusion
that of course I ought not to be angry and then jump to the next conclusion which is that
yeah although I ought not to be angry if I'm not I'm extremely coldhearted
but I would point out that my being angry at such a state of affairs would be as natural as
water boiling when put over a fire I would be very angry indeed but this anger is included in the
manifestations of the divine just as much as the villainy of the people who destroyed the Jews
they're going to be villainous I'm going to be angry it's our follows like the shadow
on the substance and so you might say then if all is the divine why do anything to change
anything if we see any sort of social injustice or what what you will disease if it's all
divine let's let it go but included in the things that are is change is irritation is
all the the workings of the human being and so the people who work to change things are just
doing their stuff at their level and they have to be included in this thing in this totality
gutter one said we work with nature even when we work against her so you have to have the most
inclusive view possible in order to integrate these two points of view and it's an over simplification
altogether to say when you've seen that the divine is in all things you just curl up your legs
relapse into the muddy and watch the world go by that's all right for old men and for people who
are physically tired and weak that's very proper to sit on one's porch and in a rocking chair
would be the American equivalent that's fine but obviously when you are young you must be involved
in the world because what has to be understood is there is no way of not interfering with life
even when you glance around this room you make an effect on it the slightest little breath
upsets things not very seriously not very much but still it does
our existence the mere fact of existence is an interference there is no way of not interfering because
you are absolutely connected with everything that goes on and every move that you make has repercussions
so one has to interfere therefore the question if you have to interfere the practical question is how
several ways of doing it which one considering the fine points can bring about dangers
things like the holy man syndrome incidentally I should mention another one about the holy man syndrome
not so long ago a young psychiatrist came to see me who had some experience in these matters
but he had a very noticeable chip on his shoulder and he was all for emphasizing the point
that says then he'd read a lot about it was a con game see he said you know your your
con man I'm a con man we're all we're all con man and he he was everything he did and said
had a sudden aggression about it as if to want to say to make a great point of that we're all
crooks now when you see that you smell a rat you see it's all very interesting but there's a rat
here this person is over compensating and therefore he hasn't really understood
but if you have to go around in other words challenging everybody with your insight it shows that you are not
secure in it you don't really believe it otherwise you wouldn't have to brag about it
and this is the result this is the cause of all most all the kinds of excess and disruptive
behavior that come from the use of psychedelics people get the vision and they go mad
they just can't keep it under their hats they have to go and use it to kick the world in the
teeth I even know an old man who should know better who says that when he's got spiritual nourishment
he's ready to kick the world in the pants again it may be just a joking way of talking
I'm not secure but that little edge of somehow having to insist on it is the same
state that I was talking about yesterday in the first seminar
when you understand it fully you go beyond ecstasy and come back to everyday consciousness
likewise when you understand fully you go beyond any special claim to be a holy man
or to be a real devil or whatever exalted position happens to appeal to you
and you come back but now there's some further wrinkle to this there always is
there are people as you know who are aggressively ordinary
and this is a peculiar phenomenon in the United States where we very much in this country believe in being natural
and so we feel uncomfortable with ceremonies and with dramatic behavior or dramatic clothes or anything
like that we feel that that's too much it's showing off it's so reminds us of the aristocracies
of Europe that persecuted our ancestors I suppose and so we we like things in this country to be
folksy and so we we we many of us were sort of beat up clothes and especially wealthy people
you find there wealthy people on vacation will wear real beat-up clothes jeans and old t-shirt
so on and there look as grabby as possible because that's natural so that's now
so or also then when people realize that they're in a very they've come to a great exalted
insight and they're going to bring it down to earth and they realize they shouldn't be aggressive about it
they're going to be as natural as possible which you can spot just like that that their naturalness is
firmly put on so I would say to to be natural really you don't have to put on any special
guys or something for protecting yourself against other people what you have to do is to do what you like
in the sense that really where what you like play what role you like so far as as long as you're
comfortable with it for yourself and don't care whether it's natural or not then it will be natural
don't try to be natural because immediately one can detect the spirits this up
so now this brings me to the last question
in view of the whole problem of the social adaptation of the unitary consciousness of the
world as a total harmony on one hand and our ordinary normal consciousness of the world
is an intensely competitive system gravely serious disputes we're discussing bringing these these
things together fertilizing the one point of view with the other what are we going to do
so far about the other practical problem of psychedelics
I pointed out at the beginning that we the whole subject falls between two stools because as a
whole neither the clerical professions nor the medical profession are ready for it and this is true
even of that aspect of the medical profession which is strictly psychiatry the divorce of psychiatry
and religion and it is generally speaking a divorce there are exceptions to this we're clergy for
example in many theological schools are trained in psychiatry and there are a number of smattering
of psychiatrists who are members of some kind of religious group but by and large psychiatry is
attempting to be a pure science without any religious commitment at all and I get the feeling
again and again and I talk to a great many psychiatric groups and I talk to them endlessly about methods
of therapy and this that and the other but I realize I get a I realize sort of it with a funny
intuition that they are completely superficial they don't even know what therapy is what they're
aiming at and so often this is not always the case therapy means success in getting a person to
behave like everyone else and to give him the same sort of tastes that everybody else has
so that he's a safe norm but even when this is not the case and many therapists say who follow
Maslow Carl Rogers and our most brilliant men I still get this feeling that psychiatry is
dying on the vine for lack of any metaphysical foundations now I said I was going to say again
something about statistics such statistics is there are are showing up today shows that psychiatry
psychiatric treatment by using other methods then the drugs they're using in asylum to quiet and
people down psychiatric treatment is extraordinarily ineffective samples show approximately that
of any control group one third of the psychiatric patients recover from their symptoms in three to five
years and one third of patients under the care of a general practitioner receiving no psychiatric
treatment also recovered in five three to five years and those who were under the treatment of the
psychiatrists came out a good deal poorer financially I don't want to say this in a way of
belittling the seriousness and the skill with which many psychiatrists are trying to study their problems
but they do have an abominably superficial concept of the human organism and of the human mind
one would think that a psychiatrist would be eager above all to explore every possible
modification and state of human consciousness and he should be expert he should know his way around
inside all of them just as a language wants to master many languages so a psychiatrist should master
many madness and many mystical states he should run the whole gamma from mystical vision
to catatonic schizophrenia and know them all from the inside because then he is in a position
to communicate with his patients he cannot communicate while he remains a mere professor of psychiatry
see psychiatry is not something that you can study like the history of Persian pottery
and it's all out there and it's subjective and so on so on so on and I've never had to get involved
to be a therapist effectively you have to be right on the inside they you have to get mixed in with it
and even though this may you may lose a certain objectivity and scientific impartiality by doing this
you what you got to acquire is the art of being able to get involved and then come out again and be
scientifically impartial and then get in again and that's difficult but it's worth trying
but the reason you see the psychiatrist is afraid so often to get involved because
he's scared of losing his own sanity and he knows you know that we walk on pretty thin ice
so far as our sanity is concerned and so don't muck around with that he's seen too many of his colleagues
work for a long time in a silence who had to be quietly removed to another circuit
happens all to readily but it is the fear of insanity more than anything which makes one insane
the fear of getting lost in all those strange corridors
have had dreams where you're going through mazes, corridors, wanting whether you'll ever get out
with anybody or crazy people have an awful time with that corridors syndrome
because they are the corridors of the mind
therefore there is a certain protection of one sanity
in being able to go into various states and above all what I said a little while ago a
moment ago was that the thing that strikes me about psychiatry so forcibly is it's lack of a
metaphysical foundation in which you see it is simply imitating the fashionable point of view
of scientism in the 19th and early 20th centuries
to push across the point of view that this universe is trivial
it is nothing but whatever you want to say nothing but something or something to
breath in it in nothing but desperately important to get everything down to nothing but
so that we can say no mystery is left about it just not so so so so so so
and that said that said a manifestation of hostility you see of hatred of life
lying under that because the people were too afraid of letting themselves go to be able to admit
that they could look at this well and say oh wow look at that isn't that marvelous
you think these things are marvelous but it shows you not sophisticated
because you see one of the one of the games of aristocracy in Europe is always to look
bored and so there are all sorts of you could put a whole history together of how
people copy the attitudes of their superiors in order to get one up on so if to look bored
was a mark of extreme aristocracy and great wisdom the scientific world which was a
pervenue then imitate it a bored attitude to everything so as to gain its status
or involved in gaming states and so it had no reason to be bored they were just
imitating keyboard and the aristocrats had some reasons to be bored you had seen everything
that had all pleasures they were plaza so psychiatry in turn picked up the attitude just
nothing but it's just the libido or something and or it's just mental mechanisms or it's just
neurochemistry or something like that one of the funniest things about LSD is that maybe it's
just neurochemistry but boy when you get inside neurochemistry is something you think chemistry
matter could evidence what have you nervous system you suddenly it is as like a conducted
tour inside the nervous system if you begin to realize that the nervous system is one of the
whamious things going he's fantastic you can't just dismiss it as a nervous system there's a
nasty porridge and bottle so then this is the thing I think that the crucial point that has to
be developed before we can handle these substances intelligently is a medical religious rapprochema
and that means reforms on both sides and they're beginning to happen you know you're probably
aware that there's a huge theological thumb-in going on in both Catholic and Protestant churches
among the Jews that the tops blown off the rotational references to it in the paper but my
clergy friends are thinking things today that they couldn't possibly have been thinking about ten years ago
there is revolutionary is almost any group I know you should talk to the local rector here in
Socioleta or any crowds of them all over the places things are happening and what is essentially
happening is that they are consciously facing the fact that they need a kind of religion which is
much more profound than anything they've had to be dealing with and they are open to the dimension
of religion which has been consistently ignored for centuries which I'll call the mystical
dimension of at last a meeting that religion is not just believing certain ideas and following
certain patterns of behavior but must indeed involve the transformation of consciousness not in
the sense of an emotional blowout like a revival meeting but something which involves a crucial
change in the sense of human identity there is therefore weaving together at this time a whole
pattern of movements more and more it becomes in the biological and ecological and physical sciences
clear that the individual is inseparable from the cosmos that after all you are an expression
of everything that's going on you're not to something that rattles around in this universe that
came into it as a stranger from somewhere else and so that behind the facade of everyday consciousness
there are depths of oneself just as truly oneself as your own will which all together go beyond
your individual organism and that these we can become aware of these depths and as we do so
become delivered from being plagued by impermanence and death and temporary suffering
the psychiatrist has to know this too because if he sits in his office and has nothing under
in his belly you know that is the what I would call the certainty of eternity somewhere here
he's really just as neurotic as the person he's sitting with and he's putting on a mask
attitude looking wise playing the scientific role distance of objectivity not
get involved with the patient use all the little tricks when he's really wet behind the ears
you know you learn a whole bag of tricks even if you've been through a
didactic analysis yourself you can just have a hold the domain of trickery therapeutic gambits
be very little underneath
so I think that some psychiatrists should be ready to take their own medicine
I mean LSD and just for an introduction to the realization that there are more things
in heaven and earth they're not dreamed of in your philosophy
