So, it is announced that the subject of the seminar is play and survivor.
Are they in necessary contradiction?
And we are going to examine the subject in the context of Christian Islamic Buddhist Jewish Hindu Taoist and scientific naturalism.
Living, it seems to me, is a spontaneous process.
The Chinese term for nature is zirran, which means that which is so of itself.
That which happens, very curious, because of our grammar that we speak in almost all standard average European languages.
We are unable to imagine a process which happens by itself.
Because every verb must have a noun as it is subject, a director.
And we think nothing is in order and let someone or something orders it and let the somebody in charge.
And so to ask the idea of a process of nature which happens of itself by itself is frightening, because it seems to be no authority.
And therefore, in the United States, we are in a serious social and political conflict, because we think that we ought to be living in a republic.
But the great majority of citizens believe that the universe is a monarchy.
And you cannot be a loyal citizen of the United States unless you believe that a republic is the best form of government.
So we're always seeking for a monarch, for someone else upon whom to push the responsibility.
We won't take it ourselves.
We're always complaining that where we are is the result of our past.
My mother and father were neurotic and therefore they made me neurotic.
And their fathers and mothers were neurotic and made them neurotic.
And so it goes back to Adam and Eve and you remember what happened in the Garden of Eden.
God set a trap by saying there is that specific tree and you mustn't eat the fruit of it.
If he had really not wanted him to eat the fruit, he wouldn't have said anything about it.
But by drawing attention to it in this way, it was obvious they were going to eat it.
So when he saw Adam looking guilty and he said, Adam, has thou eaten of the fruit of the tree, where are I told he thou should not eat?
And he said, the woman you gave me, she tempted me and I did eat.
He looked very severely at Eve and said, Eve, have you eaten of the fruit of the tree, where are I told he thou should not eat?
And she said, the supper for God.
Passing the baptism.
And God looked at the supper.
And this isn't written in the Bible, but they winked at each other.
Because they had planned long in advance.
That.
The universe was not going to be a merely obedient arrangement.
Well, I, God, say, you shall do thus and so, and you will automatically do it.
Who would be no fun in that?
Because there would be no surprises.
So it is the Hebrew theology.
That God put into the heart of Adam at the creation, a thing called the Yatsahara, which means the way would spirit.
Just a kind of little, just like you won't, when you make a stew, you put some salt in it.
You don't want the whole stew to be salt, but just a touch.
See?
So God, in creating Adam, put just a touch of wickedness.
Whether something surprising and different would happen, which God would not be able to pronounce the cake.
So this is very important.
You see, what we're going to talk about mainly, is our sense of identity.
Our sense of alienation.
And the complications we put ourselves into by regarding survival as a duty.
These all connect together. You may not see the connection immediately.
But if you imagine yourself in the position of being God,
in the literal, popular sense of God, the Father Almighty,
it means you're a male- shelvingist pig.
You're in charge of anything.
You know all pasts, you know all the futures.
You're completely in control of the cosmos.
You have absolute power.
And you're bored to death.
So you say to yourself, man, get lost.
I want a surprise.
And here you are.
Only you mustn't admit it.
The whole mark of insanity is no that you're God.
That's absolute trouble.
Not only in the Christian religion, because Jesus got crucified for knowing that.
And the Christian said, okay, okay, Jesus was God, but let it stop right there.
Nobody else.
But the gospel was the revelation to us all that the Hindus knew forever.
Tatva Masi, you're it.
And if Jesus had lived in India,
they would have congratulated him for finding out instead of crucified.
There have been many people in India who knew they was God in disguise.
Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Ramana Mahashi, Sri Krishna himself, Buddha, everybody.
They discovered it.
Because it's not an exclusive claim.
I alone am that, but you all are.
And as I look into your eyes, I see the universe looking back at it.
So we're in a situation where it's a taboo.
We mustn't admit that we know who we are.
So as to have the thrill, the sort of self-goosing effect of feeling lost,
feeling strange, feeling alone, of not belonging.
And we say in popular speech that I came into this world,
you did nothing of the kind, you came out of it.
Just in the same way as the fruit comes out of the tree, the egg from the chicken,
the baby from the womb.
We are symptomatic of the universe.
We are, it's nerve endings.
Just as in the retina, there are myriads of nerve endings.
So all of us are nerve endings of the universe.
And there are many of us so that the universe is point of view of itself
will not be prejudiced.
It will be menicided.
And so fascinating things happen.
We want to find out what it is that's going on.
And we look with telescopes to find the fathers out things.
And with microscope to find the fathers in things.
And the more powerful our instruments become, the more the world runs away from us.
As our telescopes become more powerful, the universe expands.
As it's ourselves running away from ourselves.
The more accurate our physics becomes.
And we investigate the nucleus.
There are some years ago, we thought we had it.
We found a thing or the atom.
And that was that.
Then groups, then electron turned out.
Then barren, there was a proton.
And then when we got out of those that came out all kinds of things,
and he met her.
And he got worse and worse and worse because we got sharper.
And so we are a self-observing system,
which is like the snake, the or rubber us,
that bites its own tail and endeavours to swallow itself
to find out what it is.
It's like the whole quest of who am I.
I would like to see me, but look at your head.
Can you see it?
It's completely invisible.
And it isn't black.
It isn't like the dark spot behind my eyes.
It isn't even blurry.
It's plain nowhere.
And thereby I need to tail.
Most of us assume, as a matter of common sense,
that space is nothing.
This is not important.
It has no energy.
But as a matter of fact, space is the basis of existence.
How could you have stars without space?
Stars shine out of space.
Something comes out of nothing.
And in just the same way, if you listen
and know an unprecedented way with your ears
to find out, you see, I've got these sense organs here.
And I'm going to trust them to find out what is going on.
What really is.
And you listen.
And you hear all these sounds coming out of silence.
It's amazing.
Silence is the origin of sound.
Just the space is the origin of stars.
Just this woman is the origin of man.
She is black.
So.
Also, if you listen and pay real attention to what is,
you will discover that there is no past.
No future.
And no one listening.
You can't hear yourself listening.
So you live in the eternal noun.
You are that.
Talk to our mercy.
And it's really extremely simple.
That's the way it is.
Now then, I started out by saying.
Survival.
Going on living is a spontaneous process.
A love is the same.
But the trouble is that when we are children,
our elders and betters told us that it was our duty to love them.
You've got said that our love, the Lord,
that I got with all our heart and with all my soul and with all my mind.
And that I never is like self.
And so I'm not as sad to us.
You must have a bowel movement after breakfast.
Try to go to sleep.
Take that look off your face.
Stop pouting.
Oh, you're plushing.
Pull yourself together.
Pay attention.
And all these are commands that basic rule is as follows.
You are required to do that which will be acceptable only if you do it voluntarily.
That's the formula you must love me and it's a double bind.
And everybody is completely mixed up because of this.
So, you know, this stupid story often tells the husband says to wife,
Darling, you really love me and she says,
Well, I'm trying my best to do so.
And nobody wants that answer.
They want to be told, I love you so much, I can't help loving you.
I'm your hopeless victim.
So, we are under the compulsion.
Go on living.
You must go on living.
It's your duty.
You're tired of living in scale of dying.
You must go on.
Why?
Well, I have dependents.
I have children.
And I have to go on working to support them.
But all that does is to teach them the same attitude.
So, they will go dragging along to support their children.
Who will in turn learn it from them to go dragging along and fighting this thing up?
And so, I watch with total amazement, the goings on of the world.
See, all these people commuting.
Driving cars like minions to get to an office.
Where they are going to make money.
Look to afford it.
So that they can go on doing the same thing.
And very few of them enjoy it.
The sensible people get paid for playing.
That's the art of life.
With the whole idea of struggling and beating your brains out in order to go on living.
It's completely ridiculous.
There are comeaus at the beginning of his book, The Myth of Sisters.
May this very sensible statement.
He said the only real, deep philosophical question is whether or not
to commit suicide.
Think that one of them.
Must you go on?
Because it would be so simple to start.
No problems.
Nobody around to regret that it wasn't going on in the longer.
When you know what is it like?
Death.
To go to sleep and never wake up.
All that's terrible.
To be in the dark forever.
It wouldn't be like that.
It wouldn't be like being buried alive forever.
It would be as if you never had existed.
And not only that you never had existed, but that nothing at all of everything is good.
And that would be just the way it was before you were born.
Which is another way of demonstrating how something comes out of nothing.
Nothing is the essential prerequisite of something.
But back in front of the same coin as the Chinese, say the Yan and the Yen of it.
So, like you have an invisible head.
Your ultimate reality, the ground of your being, is nothing.
Sunyata is the Buddhist called, the Void.
Which is space.
Which is consciousness.
Which is that in which we live and move and have our being.
Great Void.
Unfortunately.
There's no way of knowing what it is.
Because if we could know what it is.
We would be bored.
The little function of interest is mystery.
There was a great Dutch philosopher by the name of Van Delieu.
He said the mystery of life is not a problem to be solved.
But a reality of the experience.
And fortunately we have in the middle of all consciousness.
A perpetual problem.
A perpetual question.
That we don't know what it is that is.
Therefore life remains interesting.
So we're always trying to find out.
But it won't yield the answer.
Because reality, when you say what is reality.
The only way to answer the question of what is by classification.
Is you is or is you in?
Is you male?
Is you female?
Are you a Republican or a Democrat?
Are you animal vegetable or mineral?
Think or tell us how to say that a respectable man begging a thief?
We put you in a class.
But what it is that fundamentally is cannot be classified.
So nobody knows what it is.
And you can't really ask the question in a meaningful way.
What is reality?
Now, there are many theories.
Philosophical theory is about what reality is.
Some people say, well, reality is material.
I mean, there's a thing called stuff.
And philosophers, because they're always lecturing in front of tables.
They always bang the table and say,
Now does this table have reality or not?
And they bang the table.
When Dr. Johnson heard about Bishop Berkley's theory,
that everything is in fact mental.
He disproved it by kicking a stone.
And said, surely, to every person of common sense,
this stone is really material and physically.
Where as on the other hand, more subtle thing does they know,
there is nothing material.
It's all a mental construction.
The whole world is a phenomenon of consciousness.
When in Bishop Berkley's time,
they didn't know much about neurology.
Now we know a great deal about neurology.
And we can state the same position in a much more sophisticated way
that the structure of your nervous system is what
determines the world that you see in other words.
In a world of no eyes, the sum would not be light.
In a world of no tactile nerve ends, fire would not be hard.
In a world of no muscles, rocks would not be heavy.
In a world that no soft skin, the rocks wouldn't be hard.
The soul relationship.
So in this, the old question,
when a tree falls in a forest,
and nobody is listening, does it or doesn't it make a noise?
The answer is perfectly simple.
Noise is a relationship between vibrations in the ear,
in the ear and ear drums.
Look, if I hit a drum, which has no skin on it,
no matter how hard I hit it, it will make a sound.
So the ear can go vibrating forever,
but if there's no drum and no auditory,
no other system, there's no noise
because the noise is a relationship.
So we, by virtue of our physical structure,
evoke the world.
From vibrations that would otherwise be the void.
So you're creating the world,
but you're also in the world.
See, your body, your nervous system,
is something in the external world.
You're in my external world.
I'm in your external world.
See?
So it's an egg in the hand situation.
Perfectly fascinating.
So we are, from a very hard-boiled,
neurological point of view,
evoking the world in which we live.
And we are,
something that the world is doing,
after all,
what you are from the point of view of physics.
The physicists will explain
that you are a buzzing of electronic substances
and processes,
just like anything else.
It's all one jazz.
But marvelous,
because it is aware of itself through you.
So,
existence, however, has two aspects.
You'll call one of them on and the other off.
Because all existence is a vibration.
If I am sitting next to a girl in the movies,
and I feel attracted to her.
And I put my hand on her knee,
and I leave it there.
She will notice the first but she will become unaware of it
if I don't move my hand.
So instead of just leaving my hand there,
I start stroking her or patting her knee.
Then I go on and off on and off,
and she realizes that I am paying attention.
See?
So everything that is happening to us is going...
But you see,
take with the sense of sight,
the vibration of light is so fast,
that the retina doesn't register the off.
It retains the impression of the on.
And so, with our eyes,
we see things as relatively stable.
But if we close our eyes,
and listen,
we hear on and off,
especially in the low registers of sound.
See, in the high register,
you can't hear the off, you hear the off.
But when you get the low register,
you see,
you hear the on and off of the vibration.
Now, actually, everything that is physically existing is a problem.
Because it is positive and negative electricity.
Incidentally, read the article on electricity
in the 14th edition of the Insights of Peotainer.
Just the first two paragraphs.
Learn it's scientific article with all kinds of formula and stuff.
But it starts out with pure metaphysics.
Electricity says the author is an absolute.
We do not know anything else that is like it.
It is a fundamental thing.
It's talking pure theology.
So, this is it to see the thing it goes on and off.
Male and female, young and young.
Now, you see, now you don't.
Well, we've been brought up to think that,
with our 19th century background,
to think that this energy which goes on and off,
is inherently stupid,
that it is a mechanical thing.
Freud called it libido.
He wants to take what called it blind energy.
And, therefore, we feel that we as human beings are flugs.
A million monkeys working on a million type writers,
a million years,
nights statistically tied to the Bible.
Because they're after, as soon as they got to the end of it,
they would dissolve again into nonsense.
But we've been brought up to feel, you see,
that we are flugs in that sense.
We are simply accidents.
And that is alienations.
That is the great problem.
And it seems to me completely obvious that we are not accidents.
When we say, you know, you're nothing but a little bacterium
that crawls around on a ball of rock
circles of unimportant star on the outer fringes of the 9th galaxy.
Now, why do people say things like that until you work?
They want to say, I'm tough.
I look at the facts and their hard facts.
The idea that somebody up there who cares is for little old ladies,
weaklings.
And I think this universe is a bunch of shit.
So I'm a real realistic guy.
That's the message you get from these people.
Always, look in a person's philosophy,
as to what he or she is saying about himself.
Because your philosophy is your role.
The gave you put on.
Now, I admit, you see, my philosophy is my game, my put on.
It's my big act.
Well, I think if I'm going to put on a big act at all,
I'm going to put on the biggest one.
I can say, ah, they're all with all that nonsense.
I know very well that although I'm in permanent,
which is just the way I want it,
because I, however, wouldn't like to be permanent,
or the ball that would be.
But I am an impermanent manifestation of the witch,
the witch who is now witcher.
Of the root and ground of the universe,
which is in Thomas Aquinas with say,
is what all men call God.
Atman, Brahman.
And I think it's fun to know about.
Not merely as a theory,
but as a positive sensation,
which you can actually feel,
and so therefore,
my function in conducting the seminar with you,
is if at all possible,
that you should share this feeling.
And not need any more psychotherapy,
not need any more gurus,
and not need any more religion.
Just take off.
Except, I mean, there is something called religion
for quick, for kicks.
My favorite church is the Russian Orthodox Cathedral in Paris.
Where they really live it up.
They have gold, incense, icons,
masses of candles, and gorgeous music.
And priests come out from the secret sanctuary.
We know behind the royal doors,
the iconostasis,
divides the main church from the inner sanctum.
And the doors open,
somebody comes out of me,
you know.
Beautiful writers.
And he seems.
Oh, you are a Storokoist,
you are a Storokoist,
you are a Storokoist.
And the Quagas,
Ospery Pomi.
They goes on and on and on,
and when you get bored,
you go across the street to a vodka shop,
where they sell vodka,
and caviar,
plainly, the blitzky, piroshky, and everything,
and everybody lives it up,
then they go back to church again.
That kind of religion is like dancing.
It's a joyous expression,
and it's not to tell in God what to do,
because the other thing is in old church,
Slovanic, which nobody understands.
And it's just making great and glorious noises.
This is essentially music.
So, now, what I would like to suggest is that we have a beef,
we have a beef intermission,
such you can stretch for about five minutes,
and then I would instead of monologuing at you,
I would like to talk with you.
Have your reactions, questions?
Don't feel that you just have to ask questions
if you want to react in any way.
The whole point of the seminar,
is that it is a free fall.
Instead of the big public lecture,
it has to be restricted,
so that I can give as much of my self to use as possible.
So please help yourselves.
Now, since we are dealing with play,
our next step is the two steps now to follow.
We've got some more theoretical matter to go through,
and after that, we get into non-verbal practical matter.
But I want to talk about music for a while.
Do you realize that music could be defined
as the greatest vice and addiction in the country?
It's a colossal industry.
People are utterly dependent on it.
Lots of people can't do without music at all.
I have billions of dollars going to the making of records
into the artistry of playing instruments
and all this kind of thing,
and it's completely utterly useless.
From a practical point of view.
Everybody gets excited about people being out of hollocks,
being heroin addicts,
being marijuana smokers,
being this, that and the other.
But you could say there is a disease called coditis.
And the coditis is addiction to melodious noise.
It's absolutely fascinating,
because when people, they go to these concerts,
we are most elaborate productions of Potom,
and then compulsively they have to capture it.
So we can say that, we did it.
And here in lies one of the great mysteries of being,
because music, like survival,
doesn't really have to happen.
Now let's look, you see, therefore,
take music as a model of the universe.
Music is a fantasy with no destination.
Dancing is the same thing, no new emotion,
and when we dance, we are not going anywhere,
except round and round.
And the universe, according to the Hindu theories,
is going round and round,
but according to Saint Augustine of Gibbo,
the universe is going along in a straight line.
And this was one of the most disastrous ideas
that was ever visited in the form of a civilization.
Saint Augustine said,
if time is cyclic,
Jesus Christ would have to be crucified again and again.
And there would not be, therefore, that one perfect
and sufficient sacrifice of relation
and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.
And therefore, time had to be a straight line.
From the creation to the consummation,
to the last judgment.
Of course, then everybody stopped thinking,
because they didn't know what they were going to do,
and they got to heaven.
They knew what they were going to do in hell.
And there's perfectly clear,
if you look at Jan van Ike's painting of the last judgment,
in the Metropolitan Museum, the superb work of art.
Everybody in heaven is completely bored.
They're sitting there looking at the cat that's
one of the canary,
rose and rose and rose of them,
and the Lord God Almighty is presiding and looking equally bored.
But down below, there's a bat-wings star.
Spreading out those ghastly wings,
and there are all new bodies
and riding and being eaten by snakes and chewing each other.
They're having an argy.
But all those stately people in heaven
are in church forever.
And that is the ultimate burden.
You also observe Gustav Dorez,
illustrations of Dante's Divina Comedian.
He was a magnificent engraver.
And while he's on the theme of the inferno,
he is full of imagination.
In the purgatory, he's imagination declines a little bit
when he gets to the paradise of its shot.
Zolli has his ladies in white knight
is trailing in circles through the stars.
You know, angels.
That is no idea what an angel is.
The only man who really understands angels
is an Austrian artist.
What?
Who has fantastic imagination
as to what an angel really looks like.
But they're very rare people
who have the Persian painters
had a true vision of paradise.
Persian ministers were their lovely gardens
and jewel-like trees
and people sitting around
smoking hookers and observing the birds.
They really had it.
But it is extraordinary.
That idea of paradise is weak.
That's why I said earlier
that students should write about their idea of heaven
and get the imagination going.
Well, anyway, the point is
that we reach is
and that's never been admitted.
Is that heaven is the perfectly useless state?
What is God for?
What purpose is served by God?
Obviously, none at all.
I mean,
imagine some use for God.
It's inconceivable.
I was very useful.
I just kept out of our responsibility.
Yes, but that, again, you see,
it returns to uselessness.
Isn't it?
Like everything else.
And not children
when they're little and wise,
they're little,
they're little,
they're little,

they're little,
they're little,
they're little,
they're little,
they're little,
they have yourself.
Be useful.
Be purposeive.
So, but the universe is not.
And here, you see,
gerafs,
hippopotamuses,
ferns.
They have,
we have a look at
the high magnification of viruses.
They're insane.
And especially,
Raniolaria,
which you find in the depths of the Indian Ocean,
are the most magnificent pieces of jewelry
that you could ever conceive.
They have in the New York Museum
of Natural History,
Glass Models,
of these blown up to be so big.
And you can't conceive anything so beautiful.
There are tiara's,
there are spheres with
spines coming out.
They look like,
you know,
the thing you always wanted,
and that you want to give your best girlfriend,
is a Christmas present.
gorgeous things.
Why is it, too?
that when human beings
want to
symbolize the ultimate,
they will almost invariably pick a flower.
You'll get the rose windows of the great medieval conceivals.
You'll get the Buddhist Lotus's.
You'll get the mundlers.
They are all flory form.
Stella,
beings.
We are somehow
looked to the flower
with more reverence than we looked to the human face.
That is odd.
Because eyes
are really, in my opinion,
in the world's most beautiful jewels.
We look in somebody's eyes.
And really,
we always avoid eye contact in the ordinary way,
because they're taboo.
But if you really got some friend
and you can sit in front of them,
and look deep, deep, deep into the eyes.
This is absolutely fascinating.
But flowers,
or eyes.
Iris.
And the circularity of the eye
is the same principle as the circularity of the flower.
Color, beauty, the depth,
transparency.
My mother used to say,
show me a morning glory.
Doesn't it make you feel jazzy inside?
Okay.
Interesting.
We do that.
So,
the point is that the music
is
life for its own sake.
Where we're living in an eternal now,
when we listen to music,
we're not listening to the past,
we're not listening to the future.
We are listening to an expanded present,
because, to hear melody,
is to hear the interval between tones.
If you can't hear the interval, you're turned deaf.
So, adjust us, we have a field of vision,
which is so wide.
So, the present moment is not,
as the clock indicates,
a hairline,
the present moment is a field of experience.
Which is not what we would call instantaneous,
much more than that.
So, that within the present moment,
we can hear intervals between tones,
and rhythms.
So, that we get the field of a sequence,
going on.
So, when I talk about the eternal now,
please don't confuse it with a split second.
It's not the same kind of thing.
The eternal now is roomy, easy,
lots in it, rich.
But, frivolous.
There's a wonderful tale of what reminds me of it.
There was a clergyman, Christchurch Oxford,
who had terribly bad handwriting,
so bad he couldn't read it himself.
He was preaching to some,
and he started out looking at his notes and said,
you who are frivolous, of course.
You who are frivolous, of course.
You who are followers of Christ.
But, but, but, but, but,
do you see the connection?
Consider the little is of the field,
how they grow.
They don't have neither today's been.
Yet Solomon, in all his glory,
was not closed like one of these.
Do not be anxious for more.
You who are frivolous, of course.
Sip them.
And I told someone over lunch time that
GK Chesterton said, angels fly because they take themselves like that.
Say, there is a divine frivolity.
The love that moves the son and other stars is frivolity.
And God, therefore, might be described as being sincere,
but not serious.
If I say, if some lady says to me,
who is beautiful and attractive, and she says,
I love you.
And I say to her,
are you serious, or are you just playing with me?
That's the wrong answer, because I hope she is not serious,
and that she will play with me.
So I should say to her, are you just playing with me?
So the playfulness is the very essence of the energy of the universe.
Maybe, maybe, maybe, maybe, maybe.
That's what's happening.
It's music.
And bad music, like Britain by Chakovsky.
It has a meaning.
See, good music has written by Bach as no mean.
Bach is just making marvelous patterns of sound.
Whereas Chakovsky, with the 1812 over to you,
is imitating the noises of the Napoleon retreat from Moscow.
Even what's his name, Debussy, with this emblaided cathedral.
This is trying to represent with music something other than the music itself.
But the classical music, whether it be of the west, of the Hindus, of the Chinese,
has no other meaning than its own sound.
Now, words, you see, have meaning.
Words are noises, and they represent and point to something other than themselves,
in the same way as dollar bills represent wealth, as maps represent territory, words represent something else.
Water.
The sound water will not make you wet.
It's very important.
You can't drink that noise.
Water.
Therefore, the word is symbolic and points to something other than itself.
And so, we say, of words, they have meaning.
Now, people get all found out because they want life to have meaning.
As if it were words.
You know, we've got to have a sound up on this.
Others, they're gainly faced in your own clients.
All it is mortal is but a symbol of what?
See, confusing reality with words.
What does this mean?
What do you mean?
It's an insult to ask you what you mean.
As if you had to have a meaning.
As if you were a mere word.
As if you were something that could be looked up in a dictionary.
You are meaning.
This is the point, you see.
That the meaning of the goody about life is exactly here and now.
We're not going anywhere.
Could you get this point of view?
Look out in the street and you will see people frantically thinking they're going somewhere.
They have important business.
They have a far-up looking their eyes and then there's a stick way out in front.
They are going somewhere.
They are on purpose.
They have something to achieve.
Here and now sitting around here.
You realize we don't have to go anywhere.
I mean, you're in a way of captive audience.
But we don't have to go anywhere at all with this world.
And this is where it's at.
That's why the Hindus call the true self of us all the Atman.
The man where it's at.
That's some terror coming.
It's coming.
All right.
I'll tell you another one.
There is a being in Buddhist iconography called Avalokitesh Phra.
It was also known as Kanam in Japanese and Kondian in Chinese.
Chen Razean Tibetan.
And this is usually interpreted as the goddess of mercy.
And she is represented with 1,000 arms.
All radiating because she is the cosmic millipede.
And the embodiment of compassion.
However, she is not completely a she.
She is a methodic.
Male female.
Avalokitesh Phra.
Avalokitesh Phra means the watchful Lord.
One who is always caring.
And you can remember it because as the Kondians say,
Avalokitesh.
And there it is.
Bill.
Take a look at it.
Avalokitesh.
Kondians.
Language is simply fascinating.
You can go into this and play all kinds of games with words.
And they are music and magic.
But now, here is the thing that we are getting at it.
Is that.
A culture which excludes frivolity.
Hasn't lost the point of life.
And this is where the Chinese Communist is in an extreme danger.
They are the most earnest, dedicated to survival.
They were an awful mess and it probably had to happen.
But the style of life in China and also in Russia is drab.
Because they think that the point of life is to go on living.
And so long as you get by, no matter how horrible the food is,
how drab your dress, you're getting by.
And this is completely missing the point.
My spies informed me.
I think they still have good food if you are the comments on it.
No.
I think this is plenty of good food around the world.
I have to go that way.
I have to go that way to be persuaded.
But when I look at Mr. Mao Zedong,
even Joe and Li was obviously a fellow of enormous competence and brains.
I wish that he was more imagined.
We were talking about this just before we broke out with this kind of one here.
And as if I'd seen all the films I'd seen on Communist China,
the thing that impressed me the most, was there was no humor?
Yeah, it's a trouble.
The mistake is on page 224 of Mao Zedong's red book.
I'll tell you exactly.
No, no.
I'll tell you the mistake.
Where he says,
it is essential to have a furrowed brow to think.
And that is the era I pointed out this morning
to think that straining the muscles of the forehead
has anything to do with clear thinking.
That is against Lao Zedong,
who is the greatest of all the Chinese philosophers,
the father of wisdom.
And so Mao Zedong says,
you must have a furrowed brow.
See, there's a little slipped out.
I don't want to pick an argument with him.
Because you're beautiful.
You are so naturally without any effort.
See?
Without a furrowed brow.
See, nature does it.
But I think that's too bad.
I think that was a very good example.
But it is really basic to how psychophysical function you cannot
make your mind your nervous system efficient by straining.
See?
So he makes that mistake.
And that indicates an excessive seriousness.
This is the point we're getting at.
See?
That life is not worth living.
If it is compulsory.
Then why do so many people do that?
I mean, when you said at the beginning something about the big question
is whether to commit suicide or not,
or the vast majority of people don't commit suicide.
No.
Why?
Because, well, the answer to that question isn't simple.
You have to answer it in a kind of double way.
The vast majority of people could be said not to commit suicide.
A, some of them enjoy going on.
Yes.
Some of them are terrified of committing suicide.
Of death.
And feel there for they must go on.
It is an absolute necessity to go on as long as possible.
While there is life there is hope.
That's a terrible matter.
But some of us like to go on, simply because we are enjoying the dance.
Even if we are not very rich and live in a fairly simple way,
nevertheless, the companionship with other people,
the sight of the sun, the stars, the grasses, the sound of water,
is its own explanation.
As Hiku poem says the long night,
the sound of the water says what I think.
And therein we have this thing, which I am trying to describe as play.
Play in Sanskrit is Lila.
Lila is our word, Lila.
And the universe is called Vishnu Nila.
The sport or play of Vishnu.
And we can go into that very deeply because when we talk about play,
we also talk about the theatre.
And the theatre is very curious phenomenon,
because it is defined by a stage in a prasinium arch.
And behind the scenes is a green room.
Green room where the actors dress up.
And they know who they are in reality.
Before they assume their persona,
the word persona means in mask.
That through which sound passes,
because the masks wore in the open theatre of Greco-Roman drama,
had megaphonic mouthpieces,
so that the sound would be projected in our doors.
So the person is the fake.
Your personality is your image of yourself,
which is not you at all.
It's your mask.
So the actors come on and the strategy is that the actors want to convince the audience
that it's real, what's happening on the stage.
The audience knows by virtue of the prasinium arch,
and the kind of fencing off of the stage from the spectators,
that what is going on on the stage is not really for real.
But the actors are going to act so well.
They're going to have people weeping, laughing, crying,
sitting on the edge of their seats in anxiety,
because they've almost persuaded that this show is for real.
Now imagine, pushing this to a far extreme,
the very finest actors with the most appreciated audience.
And here we are.
See, we believe it through.
And it's a play.
And we take it seriously.
And therefore, because we take it seriously,
let me don't see through, we kill each other and a mean to each other,
and we exploit each other.
No real reason whatsoever.
If we understood, we saw through that,
and we knew that this whole life was a joke.
After all, what is the Joker in the deck of cards?
The wild card that can play any role.
The Joker is the symbol of God in the pack.
And therefore, kings, in ancient times,
would always have a gesture of God.
And what was the gesture?
The man was crazy.
He was a schizophrenic, who would make unpredictable remarks.
And everybody wrote with laughter,
because he said things out of context.
Yeah, schizophrenics, basically, are in a way liberated people.
Because they don't give it up.
You get a schizophrenic child.
And the schizophrenic child doesn't care.
Oh, whether it's knocked down that card.
Whatever happens happens.
Never, sir.
Oh, mustn't do that.
You're valuable.
We must preserve you.
This child doesn't care.
And they're blah, blah, blah, blah.
So, they got these schizophrenics who are funny people.
And they sat at least foot of the king's throne
to remind the king not to take himself seriously.
You know, in Richard II.
Within the hollow crown that rounds the model,
temples of the king keeps death as watch.
And there the antique sits.
The antique means the desto.
There the antique sits.
Scuffing at his state and grinning at his pump.
Allowing him a little space to monocies be feared
and killed with looks.
And then at the last comes death.
And with little pin bars through his castle wall
and farewell king.
You know, Shakespeare's full of this kind of wisdom
of the transience of life.
Our rebels now are ended.
And these are actors as I foretold you.
We're all spirits.
And now melted into air into thin air.
And like the baseless fabric of this vision.
The crowd capped ours.
The solemn temples.
The glorious palaces.
The great earth itself.
I all which inherit shall dissolve.
And like this in substantial peasant faded.
Leave not a rack behind.
We are such stuff as greens I'll made on.
And our little life is rounded.
Who is think?
We shall.
See, the most fantastic things in poetry.
Welcome the theme of insubstantiality of transience.
It's all fading away.
Everything we are each one of us.
Not a substantial entity.
But we are like a flame.
And the flame is a stream of hot gas.
Just like a whirlpool in a river.
Everyone of us is a flowing.
Now if you resist that, you go crazy.
You're like somebody trying to grab water in your hands.
And the harder you squeeze it, the faster it slips through your fingers.
So the principle of the enjoyment of life is this is not a precept.
This is nothing to do with moralization.
As nothing to do with what you ought should, et cetera.
It is completely practical.
Don't hang on to it.
Let it go.
