Reading the book of changes at the morning window, I rub a million stick of ink in the
dew that drips from the pine trees.
Discussing the sutras with a visitor, the sound of the wooden clapper is born away on
the wind from the bamboo.
An ancient word is as the shadow of the bamboo sweeps over the stairs, but the dust does
not move.
The disc of the moon passes through the water of the lake, leaving no trace.
One of our confusion says, the stream rushes down swiftly, but all is silent around.
The flowers fall incessantly, but we feel quiet.
If you have grasped the meaning of this, and all your relations with things, you
are free in mind and body.
Then, and ours, I'm in common, involve not a system of doctrine, not a set of beliefs
as we ordinarily understand religion.
They involve a transformation of your consciousness, that is to say, of the way in which
you experience your own existence at every moment.
One might say that the average individual, not only in the west, but also in the east,
as a feeling of himself, as separate from his surroundings, from his, from other people,
and from the earth itself, and from the space, and the stars, and everything around
the earth.
He feels this in such a way that it's expressed in all the phrases of common speech.
We talk about coming into the world.
I came into this world.
As a matter of fact, you didn't.
You came out of it.
Just in the same way, as an apple comes out of an apple tree as an expression of the apple
tree.
We say, I'm facing facts.
As if facts, that is to say, the things going on in nature around you, was something
you confronted as a being alien from different from those facts, and meeting them as if they
were total strangers.
We talk about the conquest of nature as a phrase expressing man's control over his environment,
which is a very hostile phrase.
Now in order to get the Chinese point of view, may I be so simple as to take you back
to the old lesson about the bees and the flowers?
Not to illustrate how sex works, but to illustrate the very fundamental property of nature.
There are no flowers where there are no insects, there are no insects where there are no flowers.
They go together, just in the same way, as your head goes with your feet, or as the head
of a cat goes with the tail of a cat.
In the case of man's cats, they don't have tails.
But ordinarily, if you were watching a cat walking, and you'd never seen a cat before,
and you were looking at it through a narrow crack in a fence, you would see first the head
and then the tail.
Then the cat would turn around and walk past the gain, and you would see first the head,
and then the tail.
You might assume that your experience of the head of the cat was one event, and the tail
was another event, that they would be separate from each other, but they would be related
as cause to effect.
But if your crack in the fence were widened, you would see it was all one cat and that
the head and the tail go together.
Now we have a way of attending to life, which we call conscious attention, and that is like
a narrow crack in a fence.
Our speech reflected, you can only think of one thing at a time.
And that is our one of our ways of experiencing the world, bit by bit.
For example, if you want to eat a chicken, you have to cut it up, and so you go to the
grocery and you get a cut up fryer, or you cut it up at the table.
Things do not come out of eggs as cut up fryers, they come out the entire chicken.
And so the world that we live in, and we experience, is not cut up into things and events.
It all goes together in the same way that the bees and the flowers go together.
Only we don't notice this.
We've got a way of thinking which splits it all out, and as a result of that, we think
of ourselves and so feel ourselves as if we were something separate from the whole domain
of nature.
And to make a long story short and to tell you the whole point right at the beginning,
the disciplines of Taoism and of Zen, proposed to change your consciousness in such
a way that you will no longer feel that you are an isolated unit locked up inside a bag
of skin, but that you will actually experience the fact that you are real self, the real you
is everything that there is.
But concentrated and expressing itself at the point called your physical organism.
There is of course there are of course intimations of this in the West,
thus this much is in the East, for example, to go back to something that is
partly superstitious to my point of view, that is to say astrology.
Astrology does not seem to me to be an effective method of predicting the future,
but it had some sense to it. In that, when a child was born and people consulted the astrologers,
what he did was to draw a map of the person's soul, his character.
And this map consisted in a symbolic picture of the universe as it was at the moment when the child was born.
Now if the picture of that child's soul is the same thing as a picture of the universe,
it shows that your soul is not in your body, your body is in your soul.
And what your soul is is the entire pattern of everything that there is,
focused at the point you know as here and now, just like you can focus the sun on a small point
with a magnifying glass. Now we know this to be true from the point of view of 20th century western science.
The science of ecology, which studies the relationship between organisms and environments,
is very acutely aware in an intellectual way that an organism, whether a human,
or animal, or insect or plant, it doesn't matter what it is, is not merely something in an environment,
like you might say, you are in this room, but the organism and the environment behave together.
They go with each other. If the sense of the saying in the gospels,
figs do not grow on fissiles, nor grapes on thorns.
Has this application that human beings do not grow in a cosmos which is unintelligent?
If human beings are intelligent and we define intelligence as the behavior of human beings,
the way of thinking, feeling and so on. You will not get an intelligent organism in an
unintelligent environment. An apple tree doesn't grow apples all the time. Planets and stars
do not produce life all the time, but every so often they do. So if an apple tree may be said to apple,
this kind of universe in which we live, peoples, it's a people in world and we go with it.
But the problem you see is we don't feel that. In the ordinary way we feel strangers in the earth
and so talk about the conquest of nature and facing facts of all what nonsense.
So there is proposed, then, here, a transformation of our everyday consciousness which is
a new kind of sensation. The sensation that what is going on outside you is all one process with
what's going inside you and that you are all that there is. Now you don't necessarily know
this in the same way as you know something else out over there. Let me just take this illustration,
conscious attention, which is the faculty we use most to negotiate and get around.
It's rather like the headlight of a car and the headlight illuminates the road in front,
but it does not shine on the wiring that connects the headlight with the battery and the
battery with the engine. So we are not ordinarily aware of how we are aware.
And as a result of that, we don't understand our connection with the world and we are unaware
of what our real self is. Therefore we get anxious. We are afraid that death may be the
end of us and that somehow we will just pass out of this world all together and that will be
that. Well this is of course the purest superstition because everybody is is indestructible.
We as individual organisms as what we call physical bodies we come and go like leaves on a tree
but there's the tree and you are the tree. In the saying of Jesus I am the vine you are the branches
but that I am before Abraham was I am is the self and this what the Hindus call the Brahman
and the Chinese call the Dow and the Dow is curious and so the basic idea in this is that life
is a dance, a flowing dance which consists of going on and stopping that is to say of what
the Chinese call Yang and Yin. Yang is the southern side of the sunny side of a mountain.
It is the sunny south side of a mountain of the north bank of a river wherever the sun falls.
Yin is then the shadow of the side. Now imagine a mountain with only one side. Nobody can't
a river with only one bank. Now life you see is entirely a game of now you see it now you don't
on off. A wave moves in crests and troughs. Now you can't have a wave unless you have both a
crest and a trough. This is true in hydraulics in terms of water in electronics in terms of physics
without the wine you don't have the other. And so the relationship between these two things
is called this is the most important term there is in Taoist philosophy. It is called mutual
arising and it's done like this. This is the most important idea in the whole thing. This
character means reciprocal or mutual and this is based on an old underground for a plant growing
arise to come into being and the fundamental idea is that the Yang and the Yin come into being
together. You never find one without the other there's a sort of secret conspiracy like
tweedle diamond we will be agreed to have a battle so that although they are different like
front and back are different high and low are different being and non-being are different.
Nevertheless they always go together so that to be or not to be is not the question.
See it is the question for the West for all existentialist thinking to be or not to be that
really is the question. Therefore man must necessarily be anxious trembling always. The moment
he knows that he is he faces the possibility that he might not be and so he trembles. So
if because of this then the individual person comes to feel that he is not something strange
in this world. He comes to feel that he is an expression of it and that the world is himself
rather than his physical body alone. His physical body yes that's you and it has a certain degree
of independence but it is an expression of the whole thing in the same way as a wave as an expression
of the ocean. See the ocean waves says you I'm here so in the same way the whole cosmos waves
with you and says hi and to the other waves hello glad to meet you but we are all really
the one center expressing itself play in an infinite variety of ways. Now then you say well
what does this lead to in terms of practical consequences? Well it leads to a respect for the
external world as one's own body. It leads to knowing how to get with it, knowing how to do things
to act with the grain rather than against the grain. And this is the most important lesson
that ancient China has to teach the modern West, the modern technological West is how to get with
it because you see we have in technology this fantastic power for altering the not only the
external environments but for altering ourselves we can by technology, by neurological surgery
and by drugs and all sorts of things we can change our own brains and begin to
interfere technologically with our own characters. Now the most acidine thing for us to do
would be to live in this lovely environment and spoil it by living in it. That's ridiculous.
So if you are a skillful architect who works on the principle of the tradition of Taoist and
Zen architecture you go to your environment let's say it's this great hill here and you say to
it good morning and you even bow so to it and say I want to live here but what kind of house
would you like to have on you? Well the hill says I would like a house that will disrupt me as
little as possible because I have a game going on here I have a huge complexity of plants
and insects and small animals that manage to keep this hill here all these plants retain the hill
they they prevent it from falling down and they they prevent avalanches and all sorts of things like that
so the hill suggests of a sensitive artist or architect to build a house that does not interfere
with the ecology of the hill and so he thinks now how will I do this and he comes up with a solution
where the only alteration he need make to the hill is to build some sort of a road to the house
but actually what we are doing instead of that is we are going into our hills with bulldozers
and we are terracing them so it is to make room for houses that would be appropriate on flat land
and put them in the hills now we need the flat land agriculture or flat land anywhere available
in California should be farmed and people should live in the hills but in order to do that we've
got to understand how to treat hills you see so if you look at the way the hills on the north side
and the east side of Kyoto have been civilized why they never did anything I think they they have the
most beautiful way of concealing houses in the hills so that you hardly know they're there they don't
they didn't have any bulldozers and the way the farmers have adapted their land to the landscape
and done contour farming in the hills it's exquisite so that a country of which 80% of the land is
non-arabble because it's mountain has been made in combination with the sea 80% self-supporting
it's simply fantastic they farm the sea they eat seaweeds and things that we don't eat
and all along the California coast there is a fantastic abundance of uneaten food
kelp you know how to cook it is this great and but we have to learn these lessons you see
in order to get by because we're going to have a terrible time if we don't learn so this is the
principle that is called in in daoist philosophy will weigh this means not to force things
that's the best English translation I've come to leave it sometimes translated not doing
no artificiality no interference but our word forcing has went a forced laugh
forcing a lock forced behavior forced kindness forced love in that sense forcing
don't force it so it means action in accordance with the character of the moment and of the
circumstances in which you're acting you see you can't not interfere with the world
everything you do interferes with your environment and nobody knows this better than a chemistry
physicist because he realizes especially the physicist that whenever he so much as inspects
the behavior of electrons the things he has to do to inspect their behavior alter the way in which
they behave now there was shine a light on something to look at it and that bombardment of light
affected especially at the nuclear level so in another way let's say you you put fertilizers in
the soil and that orders the ground now the ground that has had fertilizers put into it is not
the same kind of ground as ground that hasn't you understood the ground before you put the
fertilizers and it and decided what to put in but after you've put it you've got to study it
all over again to see what's happened to know what to do next time and you see this constantly
keeps moving to know things is to change them you cannot not interfere so the idea is to learn
how to interfere skillfully that's really a good way how to act with the grain and then there's
one other thing that has to be understood which goes into this term is not found in ancient
Taoism but it is found in Zen it comes in later Chinese philosophy but it's based historically
on the Darwinist view of the world and this is the word Lee now this is a very fascinating expression
it means originally markings in jade grain in wood and fiber and muscle
western scholars have translated it reason or principle but this isn't very good it doesn't
give the feeling of it Lee is the word used to designate the character of the order of nature
and some and so our scholars tend to translate it the laws of nature see
but the Chinese have no word that we can correctly translate as the laws of nature
because they don't look upon nature as a vain laws they look upon it as orderly but not legal
now you cannot write down the rules of fair play it's something that we know without being
it's too complicated to be put into words just in the same way exactly that we cannot describe
our no nervous system it's too complicated and we'll always elude us although we'll get somewhere near it
alright now the judge who understands equity goes beyond law because he is informed with this principle
here Lee and Lee meaning the markings in jade is like this when you get a piece of jade and look at
its markings you don't think of them as chaotic when you see a dirty old ash tray with the cigarette
butts in it and rolled up bits of paper pieces of clean eggs and things that everybody's throw away
you know that that's a mess and you don't want that kind of a mess around you get rid of it
but when you look at the patterns on rocks or the shapes of clouds or the outlines of trees
you've got something which isn't orderly in the sense of being symmetrical it doesn't form
force you know but you know it's beautiful and so the painter in the western tradition
has copied clouds and trees and everybody when he copies clouds and trees they say well that's a
picture I know what that's about but clouds don't mean anything they're not a picture of anything
they're just clouds they're just clouding and so the poem I don't know if I wrote it in this
set no I didn't this one called blue mountains are spontaneously blue mountains white clouds
they just do that you see that's their game and but they they're definitely something that we
recognize as having an order and not being chaos but we can't quite pin down we're in that order
consists we know it is order and we can analyse it physically chemically and we can find out a lot
about the behavior of surface tensions which are aware of explaining why bubbles in water form
the way they do why clouds form the way they do etc etc etc but what we get is only an approximation
it like for example when you measure a piece of land you're a surveyor and you reduce it to
so many small triangles and you measure those triangles and that measure the land that's only an
approximation to what's actually there fine so far so good but we never quite get it so there is this
always ungraspable in definable principle of order and things which is leave and that explains why
Chinese art appreciates in all that it does a certain element of the uncontrolled
Now you see when you use for example a brush let's take it right here or here the brush runs a
little dry and you're at the mercy of the hairs of this brush now some painters like to let
everything go wild in a certain sense the man who did that does that things go pretty wild
see but what the ideal that they're aiming at is and which you have to be a tremendous master to
accomplish is to let it go wild within limits to create a situation which overall is orderly but
allows for the unexpected random surprises and so they look upon our daily life in exactly the same way
I was talking about bees earlier on and somebody suggested to me the other day that bees are quite
remarkable for this reason that every bee does exactly what it feels like doing and yet it's all orderly
I imagine that's posing you could get out at the beginning of the day and live in such a way that you did
just exactly what you personally wanted to do you didn't take any attention about what anybody else thought
of doing or schedules or anything like that you did just what you felt like but it's so turned out
that what you felt like was what everybody else felt like doing with you and it was on orderly
performance well the bees have it and so to follow the dow is to acquire the art of doing exactly
what you feel like doing and at the same time it's move away in the sense that it does not force
anything or anybody or impose on you but to do that to act naturally you have to understand this
word which in Chinese is called Zitran that which is so with this means so this means self
self so what is so of itself this is pronounced Zitran and this we translate into English nature
although it's very unlike our word nature it means what happens without being shoved without
being forced or to so of itself what happens naturally we do have it in that sense it comes naturally
when we say that it's second nature something like that when we say that we get this thing
so the dow does a passage in allowances writing places the dow's method is to be so of itself
now we have had an image of the universe in which it's run by somebody
the Lord God is in control and he made it all he engineered it all he understands all about it
and he remains in control the Chinese is exactly the opposite it looks as upon the universe
has not been in control at all but has been perfectly orderly of itself so he says the great dow
flows everywhere both to the left and to the right it loves and nourishes all things but does not
lot it over them and when good things are accomplished it lays no claim to them
I know for example an order of sort of a religious order in Japan where it's both men and women
they live in about 200 of them they live in families and they live in a very simple way and they're
fantastically happy people but what they do is they run their garden and farm and so on
but they also they they are always buzzing around town finding out if somebody is sick
and a family is in a hopeless mess everybody is sick they can't even clean out their toilets they
can't do their washing and so on these people move in and they do clean out the toilets they do
the washing and they clean up the whole house and disappear you know it's a very curious kind
of a thing but they just they just vanish so there's a poem in Zen which says entering the forest
he does not disturb a blade of grass entering the water he doesn't make a ripple because he was
so in a chord with the scene and he flowed so easy through it that nobody noticed
water not disturbed by waves settles down of itself in mirror not covered with dust is clear
and bright the mind should be like this
