I see many faces here tonight that are rather new to me, and I'm happy about this, because
I believe in turnover.
I don't like the idea of a philosopher who has a kind of constant, cleakish following
of disciples, because I believe that the kind of philosophy I'm talking about is more like
a medicine than a diet, and you don't want to get hooked on a medicine.
It has a specific job to do, and then send you away.
Of course, if you want to come back for kicks, it's a free country, and you always can.
But basically, my idea in giving lectures and any kind of philosophical discourse is
to set people free from me.
It's like a good doctor.
He's always trying to get rid of his patients, because he knows that there are always an enormous
son of indefinite supplier of people who are going to be sick.
And if he gets rid of patients, the patients he gets rid of will recommend those new ones
to come, and he'll get rid of them too.
And that's my attitude to all this.
That's why I'm giving a seminar this weekend on the worldly religions, which means being
free from religion, so that you're everyday life and you're everyday profession and you're
everyday work becomes your religion, instead of being something that you feel bound to
belong to, and that you use as a crunch and as a support.
Of course, I'm not against the idea of religious celebrations of rituals and so on, so
long as you don't get hung up on them.
As a matter of fact, if you do get hung up on a ritual, like many Catholics get hung up
on the necessity of having to go to Mass every Sunday, because it's their duty.
They learn to hate it, and it comes out in their children, because the parents hated
going to Mass, but felt they had to, the children hated even more, and don't do it.
And thereby they deprived themselves of a celebration that would under other circumstances
be a great delight.
So we are going to move into an age now when our formal religious exercises, anything that
can be branded as religion in quotes, will only survive if it's a great deal of fun.
It will not survive if people do it as a solemn duty.
On the other hand, the real religion is not so much in these symptomatic celebrations,
and I'll call them symptomatic just in the same way, as we'd say, if a person is blushing,
it's symptomatic of a certain psychological state.
So in the same way, if people are performing rituals in the right way, it's symptomatic
of a certain interior joy and peace, which comes about, because they don't need a religion
anymore.
They've been cured of religion by religion.
Buddha gave the example of his doctrine, the Dalamal, the method of Buddhism.
He likened it to a raft for crossing a stream.
He has the raft.
You get on it and you cross the stream, you get to the other side, when you certainly don't
pick up the raft and carry it.
But there are a lot of people who are kind of rafting.
They love the raft, they stay on it, and they get to the other shore, they go back and pick
up a new load and then bring it over again.
And there you find all kinds of philosophers and clergy types and monks and people of that
kind, who are shall we say, addicted to religion?
But I want to talk to you now about the non-addictive sort of thing, where the superior,
the finest product of religion, is something that doesn't look like religion at all,
but it's simply the practice of one's life, my old friend Frederick Spiegelberg of Stanford
University, called this the religion of no religion.
You might say it's like when you get a great artist performing, it looks so easy.
It doesn't seem to have any props when a building is finished, the scaffolding disappears.
And so in this way, there are certain people whose religion was like a vanished scaffolding,
but they become really in a certain way indistinguishable from ordinary people.
And yet there's something about them that you can't quite put your finger on.
You know there's a difference, but you can't say what it is.
And so in Buddhist philosophy, the superbly enlightened person is likened to, let's say,
this verse from Chinese poetry, entering the forest, he does not disturb a blade of grass,
entering the water, he does not make a ripple.
In other words, his spiritual power, his religion, if you want, does not stand out like a sore thumb.
There's a kind of anonymity to it.
I remember once the great Japanese artist had done a piece of calligraphy for me,
and he was amazing.
He had just written on a hanging scroll, a cocky mono, the numbers in Chinese characters, one, two, three.
But he done it very skillfully.
And I was very pleased with it, and I hung it up in the, my office, in the place where there was a kind of a tokenoma, or alcove.
And just in the next few days, the great Zen scholar, Professor Suzuki, was going to pay a visit to us.
And I said, well, I'm going to hang it up, and it's going to be there when Professor Suzuki comes.
And the artist said, I hope he won't notice it.
In other words, that it should be something so compatible and so congenial with the whole environment,
that it doesn't stand out like the sore thumb.
So in that way, a person's religion can be something that becomes them.
As distinct from something that they have a hang up on, to be hung up on religion is just terrible.
Because they're always talking about it, you're always trying to convert other people to your point of view.
Alternatively, discussing your opinions and saying, you know, it's just like you found a great doctor who has got the latest medicine for you to get hooked on.
And you go around and you try and persuade all your friends to join up with you, because that gives you a kind of feeling of confidence.
The more people agree with you, the stronger you feel in your opinions.
And all missionary work is based on this fallacy.
So please understand from the start, when I'm talking to you, I'm not trying to convert you.
I'm not trying to do you any good.
I'm just doing my own stuff.
I talk this way like bird sing.
It amuses me, I enjoy it, because I'm interested.
I'm full of wonder about this human person, full of all sorts of thoughts about it.
And I like to share these with people.
Not in order to interfere with your personal lives or make you dependent on me.
Heaven forbid, if I had enough people dependent on me, I would have no sleep at nights at all.
Here we are on the phone, there'd be hanging around, there's that go away.
But simply that I think that with our exchange of ideas and rubbing ourselves against each other,
we may find something of mutual interest.
Now let's not make any more ambitious claim for it than that.
Because anything beyond that would be getting us into the world of power games,
trying to influence people, trying to control people, and I'm not interested in that.
So let me start by putting my cards on the table and saying more or less simply as I can,
what my basic approach is to the whole question of religion.
And namely, my feeling for idea about the nature of this thing we call life, the universe, and so on is.
It's very difficult to put it in the form of a belief or a set of propositions,
because what it begins from isn't the ideas at all, but experience.
I don't mean quite experience in the sense that a person who says to an applicant for a job,
how much experience do you have.
I mean experience more in the sense of the word sensation,
when you experience that water is cold by drinking it.
You can't say, now I've experienced 22 times that water is cold, and therefore I'm qualified about it.
You see, you don't go about it that way, you just experience the actual sensation of drinking water.
But what I call religion is based on that sort of state.
It's based on a kind or modality of consciousness as to what all this is that's going on.
Now we are mostly brought up in all different kinds of cultures, not only Western,
but African Latin American Eastern and so on.
The individual human being is by and large brought up to feel in some way that he's a puppet.
The rarest ways of describing man as a puppet, that he as, you see, it begins with childhood.
When the child is made to feel a subordinate member of the family,
because when children come into the world, we play all kinds of funny tricks on him.
We are not at all honest with him.
The first thing you notice is that when people start talking baby language, that's not being fair with a child.
We get these, I've been watching some educational television, and there is sort of funny school teacher type girls who are very well-meaning.
But they always roll their eyes and lift their eyebrows when they talk.
And oh, kind of simple, direct baby language of this kind.
Dear children, we are all, what nice boy will do this that in the other, you know, it's arg.
This isn't direct speaking at all, it's not as way you'd speak to each other.
It's creating children as a separate class.
The child, if you don't treat a child, in the same way as you would treat any other person, the child is instantly bewildered.
Why do you come on to me in a different way you come on to somebody else?
Because when we don't welcome children, frankly, into this world, saying, how do you do?
You're another one of us.
And we're going to explain to you what's going on.
We're playing the following games and these are the rules of the games.
And if you will please understand these rules, you will later on maybe be able to think up better once.
But what we do is we mystify children.
We put them through all kinds of complicated grades of initiation.
And most of us, therefore, grow up as still children.
We grow up always thinking that there is a parent above us.
And if our parents are long ago dead, and now I'm a grandfather, I have five grandchildren.
And therefore, I'm able to, I suppose, assume in their eyes as much authority and as much dignity as my own grandfather did.
But I know I'm just as stupid as he was.
So, because you see in our most impressionable years, we get the idea constantly.
So, there is someone up there and behind who knows the answers.
And to a certain extent, they do.
Because they're more experienced, they've practiced skills.
They're more developed in certain ways.
But we never are really able to get people to grow up to come into the state of adulthood.
Without still taking the infantile attitude.
There is something and someone who knows the answers better than we do.
And therefore, we always have through this kind of childhood indoctrination.
And attitude towards the universe and towards the ultimate reality behind it, as if we were on probation.
As if somehow we were interceding, we were saying constantly to the Lord God,
please forgive me for having the disgusting infront of it who exists.
And that goes back, you see, to archaic notions of the world.
As if it were a political state, modeled after the political states of the ancient Near East,
where great, tyrant kings were the fathers and rulers of the people.
I'm constantly puzzled as to how the citizens of a republic, such as the United States,
were supposed to believe that a republic is the best form of government.
Can't believe that the universe is a monarchy.
It is a completely inconsistent idea.
If the universe is a monarchy, then the monarchy is the best form of government.
And you ought to have one here.
No, I rather feel if I can put this into words at all the sort of experience that we are not strangers in this universe.
Although we've all been somehow, slightly with our own connivance, been hoodwicked into thinking that we are.
And we say, I came into this world.
I feel myself put upon by fate, by chance, by my environment or whatever.
And we take the attitude that we are in some way or other victims of the scheme of things.
And therefore most of what we experience is defined as what happens to us.
And only a very small part of what we experience is defined as that which we ourselves do and wish and decide upon.
So we feel experience as a conflict on the one hand, between our efforts and willing and wishing,
and on the other hand what simply happens.
And therefore we feel sort of tossed about like ships on an enormous swell in relation to the rest of the world.
But when you really consider your own existence,
you can't account for it as something introduced into this world from outside.
What you are as a total being, that is not only what you think and are aware of, but also all that you don't think about and aren't aware of.
The whole structure of your organism.
That you are this is a symptom, an expression of the whole thing that's going on.
In a certain sense, you are just as much a part of an essential expression of the universe as the sun is or a galaxy is.
Only we tend to think of ourselves as discontinuous with the whole thing.
In this way, when you look, let's say at a photograph in a newspaper,
you look at it with a magnifying glass, the picture disappears, and you see only an area of dots.
But when you stand away from it and drop the magnifying glass, the dots merge into a face.
So when you look at anything, close up, you don't see its relatedness to everything else.
Look at the dots under the magnifying glass and you don't see their connection with the face.
So our view of our own personal lives, our own work, and our own personal circumstances is a very close up view.
And we don't see how it fits in with some larger design. We're too close to it.
And we can argue, it doesn't fit in. We feel, we really are separate. We're not connected with this whole thing.
Our life, my life as an individual, is just a flash between two darknesses.
Well, there are all sorts of other flashes going on before we were born and after we die, flash, flash, flash, flash, flash, flash.
But between all these different flashes, which are like the dots in the newspaper photograph,
there are for those who want to see connections.
You think of your body as a connected, unified reality.
But if you look at your body from a certain point of view, you are composed of molecules that are vastly separate in space.
But because those molecules are so tiny and the separations between them so tiny is to escape your notice,
you don't see that you are nothing as you stretch out your apparently solid arm.
This is just, this is just, it's all the way down.
Is that some bird?
So?
It's all right, don't, don't, don't interrupt him.
He's going to make a very amusing comments at that point.
But you see this, that when you take the small in view,
you don't see the connectedness.
And therefore, you would say now, is this, the solidity,
the continuity of this arm, is that real?
And a person who always thinks in terms of the microscopic would say,
no, it's not real, it's only an illusion.
The reality is all those separate molecules.
Then the physicist comes along to him and says, that's a lot of nonsense.
Those molecules aren't there at all.
They're only my new electrons and other sub-nuclear particles.
But actually, the every part is point of view is correct.
It is correct that there are these widely separated little particles.
But it is also correct that there is a unity through the whole thing.
So, in just the same way, we're looking myopicly at our own lives
and seeing ourselves all as separate bodies.
And feeling that each one of us has a separate time
beginning with birth and ending with death, we are blind too,
the way in which each one of us is really absolutely integrated
with everything else that's going on.
But so long as we're all brought up to feel that we're here on sufferings,
then we are to that extent emotionally prejudiced,
again, seeing that each one of us is really a particular way
of looking at all that there is.
And a particular way of being responsible for all that there is.
You, in other words, yes, you did it.
And are to be praised or blamed on need for everything that's happening.
When we say, well, that wasn't my fault.
It was those scapegoats, whether they be Jews, communist,
Turks, infertals, heretics, Chinese, Vietnamese, Africans,
any Catholics, burches, new leftists, anybody you can think of,
you don't like, you can always say, well, they started it.
They have a question of trouble.
But the real secret is that you're responsible for everything that's going on.
And there is in you everything that is angelic about human beings,
and everything that's dark about it.
The question is, how do you play those two together?
So putting it in this way, and I would say simply,
that life is the play, and I underline the word play of a single energy.
And you are that energy.
That energy, like all energy, is a pulsation.
And therefore, we have the appearance and disappearance of its pulses.
You could say, I defined as a certain human body called Alan Watts,
I'm a pulse of this energy.
And therefore, I have my presence is inseparable from my absence,
as is the case with all waves and pulses.
A wave must have an upside and a downside,
or shall we say a crest and a trough, where it is and where it isn't.
And so every pulse of the universal energy has an on and an off.
We call that life and death, or it may be waking and sleeping,
or now you see it, now you don't.
And this thing is just what we all are.
From the highest point of view, it never makes mistakes.
When you watch the clouds, did you ever accuse a cloud of being aesthetically malformed?
Did you ever think that mountains would be criticized for their outline?
Did you ever think that the stars were badly arranged,
or that the patterns in foam had something to be desired?
No.
But of course, we feel that about ourselves just because of our close point of view to ourselves.
If we look to ourselves,
there are subspecies, it turned it out as from the standpoint of eternity.
We should see that our lives in every detail and in every respect,
whereas harmonious and exquisite as the patterns on seashells.
And we should find that everything that was a mistake that was done wrong,
was actually an integral part of our harmonious relationship.
Only we couldn't see it that way from our limited point of view.
So one could say that at the highest level,
this universe is an incomparable jewel of harmonious,
dancing, patterning, energy.
Very intelligent in the sense of what do we mean by intelligence,
a complex harmonious design,
included in this harmonious design is of course the fact that we feel it not to be so.
Our objections to what we wrongly think of as the disharmony of the universe,
the very fact that those objections occur are an integral part of the harmony.
So that if I feel furious with somebody like Hitler,
because he kills ever so many people like the massacre of the Jews,
I would not say that it was wrong for me to feel furious.
That's simply that that too,
if his slaying of the Jews is after all part of this harmonious thing,
so is my theory about it.
At that, from the highest point of view,
the most inclusive point of view, it all goes together.
And if you understand that, if you actually feel in your bones,
if you sense that as a vivid sensation,
you a very curious thing happens to you.
You are able to function in your everyday life without hangups.
It's like this.
Everybody is really using an enormous amount of energy protecting themselves.
And a lot of the energy we're using is only thinking about how we would protect ourselves
if we were challenged to do so.
We waste an incredible amount of psychic energy in the state of inner cramped tension
of anxiety about what will happen if,
supposing.
Now, put yourselves in the position of realizing
that you are walking and dancing around in a space,
like a trapeze artist,
but there's no concrete below you to fall under.
You can do anything you want.
Any crazy act.
Flip anywhere you wish.
And although you may go through the illusion of a crash,
there is never a real crash.
You've nothing to lose because you are, in fact, the whole works.
Only the whole works has a most interesting device in it,
which is pretending that it's in danger.
That it could come to a final end.
If this is the familiar phenomenon of goosing yourself,
of giving yourself a scare,
as if the universe were a system,
they've crept up behind itself and said,
Boo!
So it jumps.
You see?
And each jump is like the new spring of the grasshopper,
going along.
Every time it gets itself.
Boo!
You jump, see?
Boo!
Jump, like this.
Because...
you have to understand this.
This is terribly important.
A lot of people think you see that the goal of life,
the thing that you really should get hold of is power,
to be in control.
And you can take all kinds of lessons on master your life,
be in control of this, be in control of that.
Now let me let you into a secret,
what the real meaning of all these things is,
that when you study the whole philosophy and psychology of power,
and you really go to the end of it, you'll find that that's not what you want.
Imagine that your fantasy go,
make yourself the master magician.
You can read everybody's mind.
You know the future completely and clearly.
You need not be subject to the ordinary conditions of nature.
Sposing, for example, you could renew your body all the time
and never need to die.
Sposing you could be anywhere you wanted to be in the universe
at the slight quiver of a whim.
Go through this, think this through.
Everybody thinks they want power.
But if you really think through what situation you would be in,
if you had absolute power,
you would say,
man who needs it.
You wouldn't want it.
Because you would be completely bored.
So power is not the thing we really want.
There is nothing more instructive in the world
than to think out systematically and thoroughly,
what it is that you do want.
And curiously enough,
the best you will come to is that you don't know.
Because you want a surprise.
Now you can't surprise yourself.
You see?
If you're in control and you plan a surprise,
obviously not a surprise.
But you see, once you could imagine God,
who came to the conclusion in eternity that he knew it all,
he had to create something and said to it surprise me.
And that was man.
Of course it was God.
Because God had a system in himself,
whereby he could let his left hand,
not know what his right hand was doing.
Like when you play chess with yourself,
and you take each side in the game,
quite honestly, in try to make it win.
One of the most interesting exercise,
take a couple of knitting needles,
or there's cocktail picks that look like swords,
and have a fencing match between your left hand and your right hand.
And really try to get digs in,
but let the other hand be equally defensive against the digs.
It's very interesting.
That's a good exercise in yoga to do that.
Find out a lot about yourself that way.
Let not sure left hand know what your right hand do it.
But after the sort of system we're in,
that's like this universe.
Because if you understand that you don't want power,
not really.
You always want to be getting a little more power,
but you don't want a final power.
Because then nothing would happen.
It's just like when you're playing a game,
maybe bridge, maybe chess or whatever it is,
and at the moment that the outcome of the game becomes certain,
you cancel the game and begin again.
Because there's no fun in the game of the certain outcome.
My justice will not play.
Because any future that is certain is already passed
in the sense that you've had it.
So I look then upon what we're doing in this world,
every one of us is
a particular expression at a particular time
and a particular place of the whole thing.
Basically you are the witch,
then witch, there is no witcher.
You are the godhead.
And you don't have to think of that in terms of an old gentleman with a beard.
You are basically the godhead.
But this energy, intelligent energy,
is capable of expressing itself in myriads of forms.
Each one of the different points of view.
Like your eyes, look out of your head,
each one of the different points of view,
all your nerve ends,
there in your skin almost like the horns on a little snail,
all feeling around.
Everyone is you looking from a different point of view towards the world.
So in turn,
we can see all human beings eyes
as many, many horns on a cosmic snail,
all looking out from a single center.
All of us,
appearing and disappearing, coming and going.
We pop out, we pop in, we are born, we die.
We are thrown out and withdrawn.
And as you watch this, you see,
from a larger point of view,
you see a throbbing rhythm.
Each time coming out with a different variation,
one day we could call it John Doe,
the next time it's Jimmy Smith,
the next time it's, you know,
it has little subtle variations in each time,
each one worthy of being given a different name.
But it's all the same energy doing this.
Now, obviously, if you aren't aware of that,
and you think, seriously,
that you're just poor little me,
who got thrown into this world by some irresponsible parents,
and the subtle, sudden they would all these problems,
and that all it's going to be is that you've got a struggle
along as long as you can,
and maybe raise some children to struggle along
when the same idiotic way you do.
And then give up.
And you generally feel frustrated and cheated
by the whole scheme of things,
because you do not acknowledge that you are responsible for it.
That you got yourself into this situation,
but you were the evil gleam in your father's eye
when he pursued your mother.
You were your father.
Because he feels in just the same situation you did,
he feels he's an eye to cast into this world.
And he may have been brought up just like you
to feel that he had nothing to do with anything else
that he was somehow disconnected from the whole scheme of things,
really experiencing it passively as something that happens to you
that is thrown upon you.
So, so long as you choose to feel about things in that way,
you'll complain and you are frustrated
and you're fighting and bitching about the whole thing,
which is of course all right,
because that's what you want to do.
Only that you could see there's a sudden joking that,
indicates that it could be different,
that you don't need to be in that state of mind in regard to it.
That you could wake up from this illusion of separateness
and understand that you aren't
just a little animal queue,
crawling around on the surface of a globular rock
that revolves around an insignificant star
on the outer edge of one of the minor galaxies.
But that you are a special case.
Of the center, what there is and all that there is.
You know, it's interesting that in a view of the universe,
which these spaces curved,
imagine for a moment this is not quite correct,
but that all objects in space are on the surface of a sphere.
Then you will see it once that every point
on the surface of a sphere can be regarded as the center of the surface.
Where is the central point of the surface of the sphere?
Anyone?
So in this way, we can legitimately regard
every point in this universe as being the center of the whole thing.
And it's in this multi-centred sense that every eye,
which looks around and sees the world
as something that spins around you and you're the axis,
you're quite correct, it does.
But you know how it is when you hold in your hand the gyroscope.
It always feels alive, doesn't it?
Because it surprises you.
It wants to move in a direction which you didn't predict.
And that movement of the gyroscope that you hold
that seems to be against you is the movement in life we call other
or what happens to it.
When we feel on the other hand that I am moving the gyroscope in the direction I wanted to go,
that's what we call self, that's what we call voluntary.
And you can't possibly know the one without the other.
You don't know what you mean by self unless you know what you mean by other.
And you don't know what you mean by the voluntary,
what I want to happen except in contrast and play against the involuntary,
what happens to me.
But just as in the gyroscope, the voluntary and the involuntary,
the self and the other are two poles of the same experience.
So when you understand this, it is as if you had become one with or had a firm grasp of the
axis of the gyroscope.
And you know that when the north side is going the way I want it,
the south side is going in the opposite way.
And it's really all one.
Only it has to polarise itself in this way so that there shall be something happening.
That's the condition of the game.
So then we can say then there are two poles in another way.
We'll call one in evolution and the other pole in evolution.
In evolution is all that aspect of life in which we get involved in the schemes,
in the games, in the conflicts, in the quarrels.
So involved that we lose sight of the forest through the trees.
And there comes a point as in every movement where that is so extreme that it has to swing up again
in another direction where we see the forest over and above the trees and that is evolution.
Where we, for example, in our present day culture, have gone through a historical sort of psychological
historical development which is emphasized our consciousness of ourselves as individuals to an extraordinary degree.
Never, never before in his view of man, have people concern themselves so much with the plight of the individual.
Never before have there been such social services that would take every person into consideration
or at least go through the motions of doing so.
Never before was it thought important that every individual should have the chance to say of being given hospital treatment.
And sickness, all these sort of things.
But in doing this, we've raised a new kind of problem.
The individual, having been brought to so greater realization of his individuality because of the importance which society places upon it.
Isn't quite sure that that's where he wanted to be.
Be careful of what you desire, you may get it.
The individual.
So critically emphasized, therefore turns towards going beyond individuality.
Now we can do that in two ways.
You can go beyond individuality by submerging himself.
That is to say, by mindless and thoughtless adoption of a fanatism.
By joining some mass movement, some fanatical religion, some form of screwy politics.
And by working for this cause, be equally delivered from individuality as if he became stoned drunk.
It's the same thing, there's nothing much to choose between the two.
Or by going right to the extreme of individuality.
Instead of trying to forget one's loneliness, self ego feeling, go right into it.
And through becoming an individual, as intensely as you can become one,
by becoming as separate as you can get, you will discover in a very natural way that you are the eternal self behind the whole thing.
There's that wonderful passage that is quoted in memoirs of the poet Tenison,
where he describes the way in which as a young boy he often used to be alone and used to repeat his own name to himself.
Saying Alfred. Alfred.
And you know, you got, meaning that this thing called Alfred, this particular eye is kind of spooky.
You look at yourself in the mirror, don't look away, you know,
other people feel awkward when they look at themselves in the mirror. They don't quite want to look at themselves.
Sometimes if you feel your own pulse, you see that thing going from inside your fingers,
you think it starts to it and you want to rub it off like that.
Your own inner processes, your own gut is something queer.
But if you don't turn away from that, you keep looking right into your own eyes in the mirror.
At first you say, you rascal, you fraud, you devil, you go on looking, you go deeper and deeper and deeper looking into your own eyes.
Then Tenison goes on to say, after he had said this name, Alfred himself several times,
because it's extraordinary feeling coming over him.
In which he knew with total certainty that beyond this little thing called Alfred,
there was this absolutely eternal life that was forever and ever was the root and ground of everything.
And if you've ever had the experience of going back in your mind to childhood,
and feeling that there's an immeasurably ancient view behind your childhood,
a very knowing ancient of days.
But that's what happens, you see, when you go through the experience of individuality to an extreme point.
It very naturally explodes into the universe, whereas if you withdraw from individuality,
you allowable never to come across that.
You just get caught up in the fashions and fads and customary escapes, which are the solace of most people.
That's you see, the reason for being a permit.
Hermits are people who pursue individuality to an extreme.
They go off into complete solitude, and the most interesting thing you will find in the state of complete solitude,
when you get really alone, you find that you are connected with everything.
Because what happens in complete solitude is that your ears become sensitized.
And you hear all the sounds you want accustomed to hearing.
You hear your own heartbeat.
You hear the singing in your own ears.
You hear the buzz of innumerable tiny insects you never paid attention to before.
You hear the sound of the wind and every leaf responding to it.
You suddenly realize that the leaves rippling to the wind and your ear drums rippling to it are all one process.
That you, indeed, are like a whirlpool in the stream.
The pattern is constant, but the water is always changing.
You are a shimmering manifestation like the flame of a candle, which is really a stream of gas,
but never for two minutes the same.
You are a dancing vibration, and on either end of you is the whole energy of the universe,
flowing through what is called you and wiggling in the recognizable form, and then going on, you see.
You are a wave waving of this energy.
And we're all that, you see, it's doing that.
The Hermit finds this out.
Because by going into complete isolation, he discovers the reason why isolation.
He becomes so sensitive to every tiniest vibration.
And when he discovers that, then the good Hermit comes back into the world.
And even though he's involved in the business and turmoil of everyday life, he still sees this.
So what is important for us to learn?
We're all most of us involved in some kind of frantic business.
And what I want to suggest to you is that this frantic business can be your yoga, your way of liberation,
if you don't have to get out of it, you don't necessarily have to drop out,
although that's important for some people.
It depends whether you have the vocation to drop out, or whether you have the vocation to stay in.
But I would not only say it would help to make your everyday life into a yoga,
but that you won't really be able to stand it if you don't.
It's not as some people say, can we Westerners practice oriental disciplines?
It's the question is if you can't, you're not going to survive.
You won't be able to take it.
So let's get to the point of view where we can see certain types of activity,
which are normally associated with extreme anxiety.
Such as various forms of business, where we always worry,
whether we're going to make the payments, whether we're going to make the profit,
whether we're going to do this, that and the other.
Day to day, this is constant anxiety going on.
Now there is a point of view from which those activities can be conducted as complete play and dancing.
When you realize that you don't give it down, how it comes out.
And it's only when you get to the point that you don't give it down,
that you can afford to do these sort of things at all.
If you do give it down, you can't get to fall to get involved in that kind of business,
it'll just wreck your nerves and give you alces.
So it's terribly important not to give it down.
We ordinarily think that people who don't give a damn will collapse on the job.
We'll have no motivation.
It's because they are not striving for power anymore.
They realize that the striving for power is futile.
So if you realize that striving for power is futile, what else would you do?
What are the zest will there be?
A lot of people think that if you deprive people of the urge for power,
they will have no motivation to do anything.
What would be the motivation shall we call it if you are not interested in power?
Why would you do anything?
Why would you make any effort if it isn't that you want to control things?
What do you put in the place that the striving for power?
Fun.
Yeah?
Or to be surprised?
I think you said it when you were describing the point you're here.
Yeah?
You were saying, I'd say these things, because the same reason you did that thing.
Yeah, right.
I would do what I do.
Yes, but you will realize now, once, that there are several alternatives.
There isn't only the fun, which is one of them.
But say, there is also compassion, where you see a lot of human beings are really suffering.
And you can feel, now, goodness, that's not necessary.
You don't have to do it that way.
And this may supply a great delivery energy.
But the moment your energy is released from the power game and from the self-protection game,
it's free to do all kinds of other things.
You get a tremendous access.
Now, wait a minute.
Let's have an intermission now.
And then we can bring up questions after about five minutes in the mission.
Okay?
Well, now, in pursuing the subject further of yoga as every day activity.
Yeah, I presume it is understood.
Just what the word yoga used in a very general sense involves.
The Indians used two words for what I'm talking about.
One is yoga.
And the other is sadhana, meaning essentially a method or way.
The objective of which is for the individual to rediscover, to realize is true identity.
That is to say not, who he may be defined as, as a particular expression of life,
but discovers his identity as deeply and essentially one with the whole eternal process of life.
With what I'll call for one of the better words, the timeless energy that expresses itself as this world or all worlds or all possible worlds.
That's you.
And a very deep and real sense, you.
The most real firm basic sense in which you can say the word I at all.
But since this is not ordinarily realized because we are myopic, that is to say, by looking at life close up and in narrow areas, we become fascinated with the contests,
with the problems, with the gains that are going on.
Just for example, as if you examine your own bloodstream under a microscope, you would see a tremendous battle going on between all kinds of microorganisms.
And if you watched it long enough, you would start taking sides.
You just start to be worried about which one is going to win.
You would feel the crunching of the bodies of microbes as it were in your own bones.
And you would therefore forget that you are a healthy human being just because that fight is going on in your bloodstream.
If the fight at one level, the conflict at one level, is peace at a higher level.
And life is all the way like that, all the way up.
So that you can imagine what a whopping big peace there is at the top level.
When you think of our conflicts, as human beings, as the conflicts of microbes,
resounding to the health of a higher order of system.
And then if you go into mythology and think of the conflicts between Davers and Ashuras, the angelic principles,
while we, you know, what a thing that is, and yet that is at a higher level, peace.
So when we are myopic, that is to say when we are working and living with a narrow view of what is going on,
then we are anxious and depressed or fearful or whatever it may be.
Because we have lost contact with our full selves.
Now of course, we get into this way of looking at things, because for many, many centuries,
human beings have specialized in one certain aspect of their total mind activity.
Let's call it that.
We have concentrated on our faculty for conscious attention.
And this is in a way what might be called the Fall of Man.
We have you see this ingenious and valuable faculty of narrowing our gaze upon selected areas.
If we take the visual field first of all, you are actually receiving everything that is in this great oval, the visual field.
But you're not noticing everything in it.
In order to notice, you have to focus your attention on some particular face, or shoe, or bag, or pattern, or whatever it may be.
And then you are more labelled to be able to recall in memory those little graphs of attention than you would any random detail in the whole thing.
If somebody says to me, just by chance, what was so and so wearing it this gathering, although I've seen you several times, I won't remember if I didn't pay particular attention to it.
Now hand in hand, with this kind of radar perception of the world, it will be scan.
The environment and pick on things which we think are significant.
And we select things that are significant with the aid of having words, and therefore markers or tags, which we can put on to these particular graphs,
of perception.
And so we come to be completely fascinated in this way of looking at things.
It is therefore at the root of reason of conscious calculation of all kinds, it's at the root of science.
But it is, in fact, although it has extraordinary advantages, it is a very limited way of responding to the world, because it's clumsy.
And it is not the only way in which we respond and fit in with the world, because all the time going on underneath our conscious attention is an interaction between our own organisms,
and the total physical environment of immense complexity, and which for the most part escapes our attention.
We are doing our bodies, but we haven't the faintest idea in terms of language, how we are doing it.
You don't know how you manage to get born.
Not really.
You know a few stupid details, but you don't know how to grow a fetus in a womb.
How to arrange the marvelous balances, which keep that fetus warm and fed.
You don't know how to shape your bones, but you do it.
But this is nothing to do with your conscious attention.
And therefore we may be constantly astounded at the miracles performed by, say, a nervous system, upon which our power of conscious attention is based, but which conscious attention itself does not comprehend.
The nervous system is still too complicated for our most advanced neurologist to understand in any but a very partial way.
And therefore, all great skill in any kind of work of art, or craft, or any human activity, depends upon your being able to do it in the same way that you grow your hair and shape your bones.
To be able to go beyond performing whatever you do by mere power of conscious attention.
Because that is a really very superficial faculty.
It's like radar on a boat.
And the function of the radar on the boat is merely to watch out for rocks and any novel thing that occurs in the environment.
Consciousness is directed towards novelty.
And those things which stimulate the nervous system all the time disappear from consciousness.
They are beneath notice, because they are constant.
That's the difficulty of, say, monogamy.
When you have the same girl stimulating you all the time, you turn not to notice her.
And likewise husband.
That's the problem with all constant features of life.
They begin to slip from attention.
But that's a pity.
Because then we become unaware of the incredible harmoniousness of all the features in our environment which are constant.
The absolute beauty of this interchanged transaction between our organisms and the total environment.
Which if we became aware of it, we would be in a state of total bliss.
But because our conscious attention is geared to looking out for differences and for things that are new and novel.
And because we become over-faceted with it, we are mostly blind to the miracle and the joyous performance of life which is going on all the time.
So then, one of the major aspects of any doing a work, whether it be washing dishes or managing a bank,
or flying planes or whatever it is, you can learn to do that work effortlessly in the same way as you effortlessly make your physical organism function.
And only when you arrive at that point is the work that you are doing really good.
And everybody knows this to some extent in whatever work it is that you do.
If you are at all an expert in anything at all, I don't care what it is.
It may be simply that you are expert at writing a bicycle or swimming or talking or it may be cooking or something like that.
If you really achieve any degree of mastery in the art, you do it by the very fact that you don't do it.
You in the ordinary sense, but you as a total living organism which is in turn a function of the whole universe, when that is doing it, it's always incredibly competent.
And what we would like to know is the difference between doing it that way.
Doing it the hard way that is to say by conscious effort and a third possibility, the purely sloppy way, where it appears that a person is doing something effortlessly and they are really doing it very badly.
It's just a mess.
This culture today is confused between spontaneous behavior and messy behavior.
Of course, that is because we are primarily educated to do everything consciously.
And in enormous amount, a say of sociological studies and psychological studies, when you read them through, their conclusions to which they arrive are just common sense, everybody knew that already, but they've got a PhD by proving it.
That is to say by analyzing how things happen naturally so that you can put them down in formulae of words or formulae of numbers.
We say now we know because we translated it into these terms.
And all academic knowledge is the minute measurement of what goes on in the world.
In the hope that if we measure it this minutely, we shall be able to predict what it will do next and in this way control it.
That's very successful.
But there comes a point when it's not so successful.
Because in ordinary affairs of life, we do not have time, nor the expensive instruments, to make these minute examinations of our problems and what we're supposed to do.
We have to make decisions long before any kind of rational process could have worked out the right thing to do.
Life comes out as that quickly and we really have to make ever so many decisions at once.
And therefore you cannot rely on your ordinary conscious calculation to make these decisions.
And if you're not trained and accustomed to trusting your unconscious brain to make the decisions for you, you're at a great disadvantage.
And therefore basic to all this kind of thing is learning to trust your own apparatus.
You have therefore inside your head the best computer that exists at all anywhere.
And it's there to be used.
It's there for you to give it problems and instead of you're trying by muscular efforts to work out those problems to let your own computer do it for you.
And you will always be confused when you first try this.
Firstly because you can hardly believe anything can be worked out that way.
And secondly because you will accept answers from it before it's ready.
Or after it's ready because you didn't accept the first thing you thought of as the answer.
For example when people are trained in aircraft identification they expose outlines of different types of aircraft on a screen where they're exposed for only 1,000th of a second.
That's the speed with which you need to be able to recognize different kinds of aircraft.
Or then they put on the same screen eight figure numbers.
And the art of recognition is always to go for the first thing you thought of.
If you get an eight figure number don't stop to think just write down the first eight figure number you can think of.
And in a short time you find you are recording what came on the screen quite accurately.
Because you're trusting your real first thought.
But you see this is a thing so contrary to the way we're ordinarily brought up that we have a good deal of trepidation about doing it.
And this for for this reason most people find it convenient and safe to do this kind of experimentation in at first in things that are not important.
That's why you might for example take up the art of painting or pottery or archery or something that is simply a recreation and not your main business in life.
And learn first of all to do this unimportant thing in this way so that you get enough confidence to be able to apply it to those aspects of your life which you feel to be important.
And so that's why say in Japan, many people take up an art outside their ordinary business.
They'll take up tea ceremony or flower arrangement or judo or kendo which is fencing or even Zen practice.
Because this is something aside from the normal business of life in which they will get the training of how to have complete faith in your own organism.
And what does Zen Master Bunkay who taught in the 17th century called your unborn mind.
That is to say the mind he explained it this way that when you hear a bird call you instantly recognize a bird calling.
When you hear a bell you instantly know it's a bell.
That is to say your unconscious, this is what the really the word unborn means, unmanifest.
Your unmanifest mind has this tremendous skill.
And one learns to bring it out in exemplary ways.
And so you gain the faith to live that way all the time.
Now let me say that in doing this it is of help to understand that in a certain way you do live that way all the time because you can't help it.
You are actually interfering with the normal functioning of your life by making all sorts of anxieties and strategisms and inner plans and thinking about what to do if this happens and what to do if that happens.
And most of this is not helping you at all it's just getting in the way of your ordinary functioning.
Only you feel that you must do it in exactly the same way as a person afflicted by superstition, walks down the sidewalk and must not tread on any lines.
The feeling that I ought to is fun to do that of course, but if you take it too seriously and feel that you must not avoid those lines you're completely interfering with your walk.
And we're doing that all the time.
So if you realize the extent to which you are ordinarily quite leading a very quite a civilized life, but that you aren't doing it from in the sense of by conscious will and effort.
It's your innate sense, your innate intelligence that's taking care of it all.
Furthermore, it helps too to realize that you are not safe, however well protected you may be.
I notice that when people solve their so-called physical problems, when, for example, you didn't have enough money and then you get enough money.
Then you start worrying about your health.
And then of course you can take reasonable precautions about your health, you can get the right shots and immunizations and so on, but there's absolutely no way whatsoever.
Of foolproof avoidance of accidents.
Despite the best predictions of physicians, you can always get a heart trouble suddenly or kidney trouble or something.
And there is no safety.
And therefore, going along with realizing that you quite ordinarily do transact the affairs of life in this through your unconscious intelligence, you also realize there is really no way of protecting yourself.
And an enormous amount of energy you use to protect yourself is completely wasted.
In other words, you may be, you may discover through becoming aware of your own body that you are in a constant state of tension.
As if ready to jump, ready to defend yourself, or even you're trying to hold your body together.
Charlotte Silver finds that when she gets people to lie on the floor and relax, they can't do it because they are, in fact, trying to hold their bodies together.
In the fear that if they didn't, they would disappear into a kind of jello and stop all over the floor.
And all that you see, all that constant sense of, I should control what's going on.
It's completely wasted energy.
For the simple reason that conscious attention is not really the effective controlling force in your life. It's merely the lookout.
It's merely an information source, which warns the organism as a whole of unusual features of the environment, unusual changes.
That's why conscious attention tends to notice things that move rather than things that are relatively still.
Why tends to notice figures rather than backgrounds?
Because it is the radar of the organism, it is the trouble shooter.
And if you identify yourself with your trouble shooter, well then you become one-sided and you become a perpetually anxious person.
Whereas on the other hand, if you see that you are identified principally, not with that trouble shooter, but with the whole organism,
then you become identified rather with that aspect of your being, which is an constantly harmonious relationship to its environment.
We can of course explore at another moment in the seminar, those peculiar times of relationship to the environment,
when the organism is being burnt up in a forest fire or something of that kind,
and how it responds to all those changes of circumstances that are, as we say from the relative point of view, destructive to the organism.
But actually the organism and the environment are not two things.
The environment is not the enemy of the organism.
Nor is the organism the enemy of the environment.
Their behavior goes together in a constant and rhythmic expression of the greater organism of which they are both aspects.
And the more your vision is widened and the more you live from that point of view,
the more you see the total lack of necessity of being on the defensive all the time.
Furthermore, as soon as you are not on the defensive and not trying to hold on to your control of life,
by the reason of the greater energy available to you,
and by reason of your, I would say basically friendly and cooperative and open attitude to other people.
You are by this non-defending attitude, much better protected than you would otherwise be.
Because it's people who got a chip on their shoulders and were on the defensive who are always trouble makers.
Whereas people who are generally speaking friendly to whom they relate,
they don't get into difficulty very easily.
They don't create difficulty.
It's the same thing as cats when cats fall, cats are relaxed and therefore don't get hurt.
And so my father once when he was a young man was suddenly slipped on a staircase.
It was a very steep one and fell down and it happened so quickly he didn't have time to resist.
And therefore he wasn't hurt at all.
This is the principle of falling in judo.
You learn to fall and the certain kind of cat-like heavy loose way.
And so when you get thrown you don't get hurt.
And experts can fall on concrete and still not be hurt.
You're not just on padded mats and things like that.
So all this comes about.
Not so much through a system or effort.
But it comes about through a clear understanding of what your situation actually is.
Face the facts.
We talk you know of facing facts of something difficult.
Creatures and politicians are always talking about hard facts and down to earth realities.
Because if there was something very unpleasant that we had to wake up to.
But I would rather say that the facts of our situation of the world
aren't so bad.
But if we did arrive at the facts.
We would find that many things that we call hard facts and difficult problems are simply the result of not facing the facts.
Not seeing what our situation is.
Of not realizing that we are completely vulnerable.
And there's no way of being otherwise.
We are protected.
And that however protecting ourselves is not the way of life that evolution has favored.
You see contrasts the mollusks in the mammals.
The mollusks have hard shells on the outside and the soft flesh inside the shells.
The mammals have the soft flesh on the outside and the hard bones in the middle of the flesh.
Now this species is more viable biologically.
Because it is more sensitive.
And so it's found that this is why we abandoned armor in warfare.
Because it's so constricted motion and so reduced vision and sensibility and speed of movement.
That it really didn't work out.
And so in the same way, you can think of the disastrous French experiment of trusting in a marginal line.
What a flop that was.
And all elaborate defense systems are illusions.
They don't work.
Because life is basically lived as an act of faith.
It is an adventure into the unknown.
So to the degree you see that you come to your senses and see that's the way things are.
Whether you like it or not.
This is the realization.
Alone is the greatest help.
In actually attaining the attitude of let-go-ness and the understanding of let-go-ness and all the new energy that comes with it.
Don't therefore say.
You see, it doesn't really help what I call think positive in the sense of repeating to yourself.
All is peace, all is love.
I am letting go.
I am trusting God loves me and all that.
It's easier to do it the other way.
That there is no safety.
See, everything is falling apart and as good as dead already.
And therefore stop resisting it.
In this way you see, you are not fighting things.
You are taking the facts and allowing them to help you.
So then you will naturally, therefore begin to find as you do this.
But you seem, for example, in doing everyday things, to be getting happy hunches.
And to be a center of interesting and fortunate accidents.
For example, of often found that when they stopped worrying about where the money is going to come from, it starts turning up.
That you get good ideas.
Suddenly come to you like a comedian on the stage when he is making gags.
And he doesn't plan the situation in advance because he doesn't know what kind of a situation is going to arise.
But somehow something works for him so that he is constantly witty and has these comebacks which make everybody laugh.
I had a friend who was saved in a most desperate situation by this faculty.
He was attached to a unit in the Second World War in Asia under the command of Melvin Douglas.
And they were curious group because they were entertainers responsible for going to US installations all over Asia.
And they had no rank. They simply assumed whatever rank they were going to be with.
Well, they especially sent my friend out to situations where there was trouble.
Well, for example, there were bad relationships between the commander and the rank and file.
And there was one such base inside China where there was an American Colonel who was just a beast and a testy fellow.
And they gave him orders to go in and take the stuffing out of that guy.
So his act was a ventriloquist and he had a dummy called a sad sack.
And he got on the stage and this huge auditorium in a tent or something was set up.
And here was this Colonel with a nurse sitting in the front row.
And so he began a dialogue with his dummy in the sack and began making rude remarks about the Colonel.
And the commander in this count.
Then the Colonel said, soldier, get off the stage.
And so my friend said nothing with the sad sack came back with some crack out of him and he said,
So when they get off the stage, I have you caught Marshal.
And despite anything the sack had said so far, there wasn't a laugh from the audience.
They were frightened of the Colonel and suddenly the sack said,
Oh, shut up or I'll put you back in my juxtap.
And my friend said he had no idea. He had never premeditated such a remark.
It simply came like that. And the house broke up just absolutely broke up.
And the Colonel just strode out of the room.
He was completely deflated.
My friend says to this day, it was the sack that said it.
I didn't.
So this is extraordinary thing you see that this thing can come to the rescue.
When so often in situations of this kind,
we think much later of the funny thing we should have said.
And at the time we're completely tongue tied.
When you see you are tongue tied or action tied,
because the degree that you are anxious about the situation and are concerned with it,
if you're not concerned, somehow everything is released.
When you see that's basically the whole process of training in Zen Buddhism,
which is rather unique in this respect.
It is a situation where you are in an environment with a teacher,
who constantly challenges you.
With problems that you cannot solve by ordinary thinking,
and that you must come back with, come back at.
Without going through the process of conscious decision,
the whole idea of a colon, you see, a Zen problem,
like what is the sound of one hand.
All these things are thought stoppers,
thought blockers,
which therefore can only be their barriers,
which you can only pass if you act without stopping to think.
Now, you see again, we think in our culture
that a person who doesn't stop to think is thoughtless,
and is therefore irresponsible and unreliable.
But while that is to a certain degree true,
it is also true that a person who does stop to think is unreliable,
because he can't make decisions fast enough.
So we are getting to a point now, which is really rather good.
We are handing over all decisions which require stopping for think to computers.
Which will analyze in a rational way these problems,
much faster than we can ever dream of doing.
And therefore, since we will hand over these sort of responsible decisions to computers,
we will be left free to exercise our hunch-like and spontaneous thinking
in a much greater degree than before.
Now actually though this hunch type thinking will apply to responsible decisions,
I suppose it's always a matter of responsibility when you add up a line of figures.
I personally have got an adding machine and I don't bother with this anymore.
But Buckman's the fuller was telling me the other day that he can read a line of figures,
like you read a line of print.
And he can glance down a line and know it's total in fact he can do two lines at once.
And he just says he doesn't even think about it.
He lets his mind do it.
And he invariably comes out right.
And this of course is the way in which they train people in fast reading.
Simply assume that whatever you see you will remember.
Don't try to push your memory and say gang gang gang gang gang, remember that you see.
Simply assume that your memory works.
And as I say at first this will discourage us and not work because we're frightened of it.
But if you do this in something that you're not frightened about because it is not very important,
you will be able to see that it does work.
And that you as an organism are fundamentally to be trusted.
Now of course therefore in the culture where then has played such a dominant part,
say among the Japanese, all sorts of stories about how this works in relation to the various skills and craft.
One I like best is about carpenters.
A carpentry in Old Japan is very definitely a yoga.
And the carpenters always prided themselves in their freedom from any plans.
In designing a house they still do this day when you watch them.
They have the very rough sketch of what's supposed to be done.
And they do incredibly complicated joinery.
You know those wooden Japanese puzzles you buy in all sorts of stores.
They are simply throw off of the carpentry technique of joinery.
They'll put together the beams at an angle at the corner of a building in the most amazing locked interlocked ways.
Very beautiful. And for that they do the whole thing by feeling by eye.
No measurements. And they'll get absolutely clean fits without measurements.
You see word is a vegetable. It's not like steel.
And it's got all sorts of given fluctuation in it with the temperature it changes.
And therefore they relate to it in an organic way instead of a mechanical way.
I was once having a conversation with a Zen master through an interpreter who was a priest.
And the interpreter was saying the Japanese carpenter in not using a plan for his building was very likely attitude of Zen.
In everyday life. So I posed a colon to those gentlemen.
What happens in the case of a person who makes a blueprint but doesn't make a plan for it?
Do you always make plans to make plans to make plans to make plans? Of course you don't.
And therefore what I'm talking about is the not an anti-intellectual approach to life.
Thoughtless in that sense. Because when a scholar does his work and the scientist does his work.
He can also do it in the same spirit. He can intellectualize spontaneously.
He can be reasonable with his intuitive capacity of mind.
About the carpenter's.
We're always having most marvellous happy accidents.
There's a great story of two rival unions of carpenter's in one town had been contracting to build a temple.
And the people who had not got the contract were very angry with those who had.
And the day came for raising the roof beam which is a great ceremony.
And when the master carpenter arrived to raise the roof beam early one morning.
He suddenly found that it had been tampered with overnight.
And that they had gone and cut six feet of it.
And all the people who were measuring came and said to him, this is terrible. What are we going to do?
He said, don't worry, it's perfectly all right, I'll fix it.
And so he went up to the roof beam and solemnly struck it with his hammer.
And said, now raise the ropes and put it in position.
And zipped it went up and fitted perfectly.
So he had actually made it six feet too long.
In the knowledge that some monkey business would be played.
So you know, the literature of what I would call applied Zen is just full of tales like that.
You perhaps some of you have seen the film of Miyamoto Musashi.
It was this called Samurai.
And he was a great master of this kind of thing.
Because as he got older, he had been a terrific swordsman, nobody could defeat him.
But he realized that his last battle was one in which he was absolutely challenged and forced into killing.
And absolutely beautiful young man was a wonderful swordsman.
And he just felt depressed about the whole thing.
So he developed in his later life the no sword school of never having to use the sword at all.
Because he would outwit any opponent long before it got to the point of fighting.
So he was one day traveling across the lake, Big Lake Miyamoto called Bewa.
And on the ferry boat there was a very drunk and rambunctious samurai who challenged Musashi and said,
I see your swordsman, what school do you belong to?
And he said, I belong to the no swords school.
And he said, ah, no swords school.
And this drew his sword and said, let's see what you can do with your no swords school.
Musashi said, now look, there are many people on this boat.
And if we start fighting, innocent bystanders might get hurt.
So why don't we go over to that island there?
And we can fight it out there.
So he said to the ferryman, take us over to the island.
And as they came along, sure, this drunk samurai was so eager for the fight that he left off the boat first.
Under the island.
Perhaps Musashi grabbed the boatman's arm and pushed the boat out into the water.
He said, there, you see my no swords school.
So, ah, has a guy who was a great Japanese artist and friend of mine called all that kind of thing, the controlled accident.
And you see, in every art, this is the marvelous thing.
Well, I pointed out last night in discussing my own sort of basic philosophy.
That what we are always looking for in life is a surprise.
That we really don't want a life situation in which we have complete control over everything.
And therefore, all future happenings are known because if they were known, they would already be passed.
Of such a future we could say in our own inimitable slang, you've had it.
Now you see then the accident that happens is the surprise.
But pure accident is of no interest.
Because you realize the accidental.
Only in terms of there being also something controlled which contrasts with it just in the same way as you recognize a figure by its contrast with the background or light by its contrast with darkness.
So the accidental is realized in relation to the controlled or we could say the random is recognized in relation to order and vice versa.
And therefore, what is sort of optimal in life is exactly them, the controlled accident.
Where you can watch, for example, the Japanese putters doing designs on plates, and they'll pick up plate after plate,
and they've got a brush with glaze and they go like that.
And all sorts of drips of glaze fall at random, but within a controlled swirl of the brush.
And one after another, they'll just go on the stack like that.
Every one of them different, because the chance falling of the drops was different each time.
And yet behind those falling drops, there was a rhythmically dancing hand.
See, there was the element of control.
And you can show this to yourself by a very simple formula, which I don't recommend that you put this on exhibit,
which you can have a wonderful time if you proceed as follows.
You take a black, heavy, black brushful of ink or a felt pen, and you make on a piece of paper completely random squiggles.
Then, in a very careful way, you fill in all those squiggles with planned and highly controlled coloring.
And you will see that you've made a rather interesting design. It may not be a great work of art yet, but it will certainly be something interesting,
because of that combination of the random element and the planned orderly element.
But you have to allow the random to occur.
And then the very skilled art is, of course, finds, that he does his control things in a random way.
As he gets to being able, as you all know, how to steer a car or ride a bicycle or whatever it is, or swim, quite thoughtlessly.
Because the control is completely in the hands of the unconscious, non-attentive functioning of your mind or nervous system.
So then, I'm saying that this way of functioning, not as an ego fighting and wrestling with the world.
But as your organism, working as an expression of the whole energy of this universe of God or whatever you want to call it,
will work at anything that you do far more effectively that way than your present ideas of forcing it to do its job.
And one has to be willing to take the risk of being a complete fool to make the transition from one way of working to the other.
All right, let's have an end of it.
I thought that in discussing the yogas of everyday life, I should get rather specific and speak in detail about one of the yogas of everyday life as an example of all of them.
And I could have chosen something exotic, like learning judo or archery or something like that, you've got a book then in the art of archery, which does this for archery.
Then I thought it would be much more interesting to talk about something near to home and discuss yoga in terms of cooking.
Now, this is an art and a religion, which in the United States we know a little about, especially in the last maybe 20 years.
But during which there has been an absolutely phenomenal sale of books on cooking, cook books of all kinds.
There are among the best selling books in this country.
But for all that, what we might call our public standards of cooking have not very much improved.
Although you can find in homes and in individual life, a great many excellent in the accomplished cooks, still there are very few cases where the art of cooking itself becomes something of a yoga.
And that's because we believe that so practical and everyday and affair cannot be spiritual.
I've sometimes said scratch an American and discover a Christian scientist.
Because there is a kind of universal feeling that the process of biology, which involves absolutely fundamentally eating and eating of other living organisms, is something we are rather ashamed of.
You have to be in the situation where you depend for your continued existence upon the destruction of animal and vegetable forms.
That is a formidable situation to be in.
And it's one which we tend to gloss over and not really meet the challenge which this predicament offers to us.
We would like to in a way meet the challenge and we foresee perhaps an age.
When all food will be compounded synthetically in labs and be assimilated in the form of pills.
And all you will have to do will be to take so many pills a day of different colors as prescribed by your physician dietitian.
I end up in accordance with your needs and you'll just take those particular small pills and that will be that.
You won't have to go through the crude material and vulgar process of eating.
Now this would be very dangerous indeed if we got to that point because it would allow us to imagine that we do not belong to the biological process.
That we do not either have to eat other creatures and what is still more important be eaten by them.
Human beings are trying and have been trying for years to be top species.
And top species means the one who eats but does not get eaten.
And therefore we are the only species of life on earth that hordes its own dead.
Isn't that a fascinating and terrible thought? We hord our own dead as if they were buried gold.
And try and have tried since the time of the ancient Egyptians.
So to mummify and preserve dead human bodies that they are not devoured by worms and do not become manure for the ongoing process of life.
And I feel that that's an extraordinarily ridiculous feature of our existence and is somehow connected with our failure to know and to feel that we are continuous with the rest of the universe.
That we are one life for it.
But to the extent that we don't feel that, to the extent that we have been brought up to consider ourselves as external observers and controllers of the rest of nature, the heads of nature, the chiefs of nature.
To that extent we resist belonging to the mutual eating society which biology is.
And to the extent that we refuse to belong to it.
We become the most predatory monster on the face of the earth who is destroying itself and its own life indirectly.
More effectively and swiftly than even swarms of locusts.
There are of course from time to time in the biological world phenomena where the predatory animal, insect or mouse or rat or whatever it is.
Simply eats itself out of existence.
And we could very easily do just that.
We could become a species of life which conquers this planet and which has no natural enemy.
That is to say, no other form of life which feeds on us.
And the moment you are in the position where you have no natural enemy, nothing that feeds on you, nothing to which you can offer your body.
And say, this is my body which is given for you, do this and remembrance of me.
Once you are in that position, you are in a fatal position.
Because you nothing will then stop you from devouring everything inside.
And to lose start becoming a cannibal, eating up your own kind and one way or another.
That is going to be the end of you.
It is therefore not insignificant that in this particular culture where a cooking is not really,
on and out, except among really a rather small segment of elite, dilatant, few senses.
That there should be a popular way of death, way of the American mortician, which is aimed at preventing the human corpse from being re-acimulated into the life cycle.
They are all pickled in formaldehyde and put in enormous bronze caskets in concrete graves,
so that the beneficent offices of the worm and the maggot shall be frustrated.
Now you have spent all your lives absorbing into your system the products of the soil.
And therefore it is your biological duty to return to the soil what you got from it.
Both in terms of sewage and in terms of your own corpse when the time comes to die.
For the most fertile fields have been found in times past to be fields of battle, where many corpses lay dead and were absorbed into the soil and they grow magnificent wheat for the cycle of life goes on.
But we are resisting this and the resistance to giving our bodies back to the earth goes hand in hand with our general disregard of what we call ecology.
Ecology is the science of the relationship between living organisms and their physical environments.
And it's one of the most important branches of science that there is.
If we do not pay attention to the science of ecology, we more and more tend to be beings who foul our own nests and who create what we would call spoiled environments.
Would be tourists are always asking about various foreign countries. Is it spoiled yet?
That means doesn't it have enough of us visited the place to make it no longer worth visiting?
Have we turned the Hawaiian islands the Caribbean?
Japan, Burma, Selam, anywhere you like, have we turned it into a tourist trap?
A place in other words, well, you can no longer find human beings in their natural state.
But find them in a new state.
The what I would call the early technological state of being at war with nature of continuing the Jewish and Christian superstition.
That man is to be top dog.
The man is as it were not a feature of nature, but a stranger in the earth who has as it were come into this planet as an embodied spirit.
And whose nature as being spiritual is alien to the nature of the earth.
It's curious, you see, that even since the 19th century, since the rise of what we call scientific naturalism,
since the rise of the philosophy of life in which supernaturalism and the supernatural origin of man are repudiated.
And we look upon ourselves as products of an evolutionary process.
Rather than a supernatural process, we evolved, yes, according to the doctrines, indeed, the dogmas of scientific naturalism.
We evolved from our lower animal friends, but the people who believe in this philosophy are even more than traditional Christians and Jews antagonistic to the processes of nature.
The outcome of scientific naturalism is a technology which is dedicated to the conquest of nature.
Because it's based on a doctrine which we deeply resent, even though most of us believe it.
And this doctrine is that the natural universe is a mechanical process,
which because it is mechanical and nothing other than mechanical, that is to say, because it can be described and accounted for in a strictly logical way.
We curiously, therefore, feel that it is essentially stupid.
Or machines, even though we revered them and depend on them, are regarded as stupid, even in a sense that they have no heart.
In the sense that they are purely logical, and therefore do not care about the things that human beings really care about.
They have no love in them.
And we believe, you see, if you are brought up in the tradition of thought of 19th century science, that the universe is fundamentally lacking in love, it doesn't give a damn.
It has no feeling, and it has no intelligence.
The human being is an evolutionary flute that has come into this world as a result of a chance permutation and combination of biological elements.
And we therefore, this superstition about the nature of man goes hand in hand with some of the superstitions of science.
Not that these superstitions are any longer held by really understanding scientists, but it is a fundamental to scientific superstition, that the human being can stand in the situation of an objective observer of any given situation.
That you can, as it were, be impartial and view what is going on with a code calculating intellect that sees what is as distinct from what one might wish to be.
And a person who is the victim of what I would call scientism as distinct from science is very liable to suppose that we are afflicted by wishful thinking, and that if you are the kind of person who is reliable objective and clear,
you are one who must necessarily take a grim and dim view of the universe.
Because that will advertise the fact that you are tough-minded, and to be tough-minded will be your particular condona or point of honor.
And so you will look upon all those who regard the universe as being in some way vital or intelligent as fully-minded.
Because you will give yourself a case of extreme intellectual populism, or being a prickly, in your attitude to all facts, analytic, hard-boiled, definite,
precise-send of rigorous.
And that will advertise the fact that you are, after all, someone who has come to your senses, actually lost your senses, and you've only found your mind.
And it's very truly said that you have to go out of your mind to come to your senses.
That is to say, you have to be liberated from the confusion of the symbolic world with the real world, and I've talked a great deal about that, that's far.
But here is you see the great problem of 20th century man basing his way of life on 19th century ideas, which are today the common sense of most educated individuals.
That there is an implacable resentment against our biological situation.
We endeavor in myriads of different ways to conceal the fact that we are biological beings.
Our clothes, our social institutions, in ever so many ways, are trying to say, we are not mammals.
And anything that emphasizes our mammalian qualities is really considered vulgar.
Of course, we can't resist the truth that we are mammals.
That's why American men are absolutely fascinated by female nama, by breasts.
Because you know truth will out.
So then, when it comes down to a very, very fundamental biological science and art, the art of so rendering food that it becomes extremely well absorbable, we have our qualms and we don't really go to it.
And yet you see, as I suggested in the previous talk here, the human being is like a well pool in water.
The human being is a pattern of life, which is a particular form of activity in a stream about the human stream consists of water, milk, wheat, cow vegetables, all food stuff whatsoever.
In the process of being processed by us, in your lifetime you have processed the innumerable tons of groceries.
And therefore you are what you eat.
Every fiber and cell of your bodies is beef steak and potatoes and so on in the course of being processed humanly.
And therefore those people who stand at the entryway whereby this stream enters the human organism and becomes changed into our form is in a very responsible position.
For as cook standing at the kitchen range, you are most veritably a priest at an altar.
And if you do not realize the priestly and magical nature of your function as a cook, you are doing the human race a great disservice.
The trouble is of course that the average person who cooks in our culture is a harassed housewife.
Who has to do this every day to get meals ready for children and adults who are fundamentally in a hurry to do something else other than eat.
Breakfast in the morning is usually a madhouse because everybody has to get up to get the children off to school in time and get the husband of the family off to work in time.
And this is usually postponed to the last minute, among other reasons because of course going to bed the night before was postponed to the last minute.
Because there was some fun going on the night before, over which and because of which one had to hurry through dinner in order to get out to it whatever it was.
When we do tend to regard meals as medicine rather than diet, we will take packages of ordinary foodstuffs.
And we will find on them in small print the same sort of chemical analysis of what's in it as you get in a bottle of pills.
Every package of food has to have its contents spelled out, you see, as if it were medicine.
You buy, say, an ordinary envelope of gelatin and there's a chemical formula on it.
Because we are looking at this food for what good it will do for us.
We are firmly of the opinion therefore that we eat in order to live rather than that we live in order to eat.
Therefore the pleasures of the table, the art of the kitchen, is simply relegated to being a means to an end.
It enables us to continue our biological existence in order to, in order to what make money or be cultured.
And people who listen to music or go to plays or read books with the motivation of becoming cultured people never listen to the music.
Don't understand the play and don't really read books.
Because they always have one eye on what kind of person this activity is turning me into what status it gives me.
Therefore, one never really does it.
So in order to be human, in order to be cultured and civilized in the highest sense of the word, it is absolutely necessary to everyday life that we take the art of cooking sincerely.
That we regard the process that goes on at the table as one of fundamental spiritual and religious importance and make it a yoga.
Not only what goes on in the kitchen, but also what goes on at the table itself must for us become an occasion where we regard ourselves as involved in one of the most important worthwhile things that we do.
Because you see, if you only eat in order to live, you will not digest your food properly.
You will bolt it, wolf it down just to stop the knowing.
And so I'm a quote, Henry Miller, so anything down the hatch to stop the knowing feeling and swallow it doesn't bite him.
If that doesn't work, see a surgeon.
If that doesn't work, get a Hollywood funeral.
They're the duckiest, the cutest females.
Why? You can have your beloved, propped up, reading something like the Bhagavad Gita and smoking a cigarette.
Forever, cigarette guaranteed not to rot away before the lips or the butters.
Oh, death, where is thy sting? Oh, grave, where is thy victory? Jolly, what, eh?
But that's the problem, you see, of this using food merely as a means to an end.
I was in the airport, I tried to find something for lunch just before coming down here.
And there were three girls in their late teens sitting at a table next to us.
And their lunch consisted of French fried potatoes with ketchup and Coca-Cola.
So they were putting down.
And this sort of thing goes on all over the place.
You, uh, Lucius Bibi, who was a great bong vivon, one said that south of the Mason Dixon line everything is fried in rancid axle grease.
And that's pretty much true. I remember not so long ago that for my sins, I was lecturing in the state of Virginia.
And I was in colleges most of the time, see.
And I was condemned therefore to eat the offerings of college cafeterias.
And a sorority and fraternity house cooking. And it was so abundant that I literally stopped.
You may say, I'm fussy, but I will not eat unless I am literally starving and have been starving for days and days when anything will taste good.
But a normal person should not be asked to eat the incredible messes of ruthlessly boiled vegetables.
Meet that has suffered in electronic purgotries for hours.
And it's served to you in a gravy that was made of water, bouillon cubes and library-pays.
And this is simply not fit for human consumption and the fact that the whole academic world without question, faculty and students eat this notorious garbage.
Is it course rotting their brains and making them highly uncivilized?
They're just unpardonable. There is no excuse for this at all. Part of the reason is that college kitchens are supervised by dietitians as distinct from cooks.
And these two classes of persons are really mutually exclusive because the dietitian thinks our food in terms of its chemical contents, in terms of its calories, its vitamins, its proteins, and so things through a test tube.
Whereas an accomplished cook thinks with his tongue. And with his belly. And with what fundamentally is good for his gut.
And he comes and accomplished cook comes from a long tradition. Be it a French cooking or a Chinese cooking or an Indonesian cooking, Indian cooking or whatever it is.
He has a long, long historical tradition behind him of excellence. And the French cook, no one is more proud, no one is more delighted with his art.
And the ventner who goes with him is also equally important as a person in seeing that human beings remain civilized at the table.
And at the table is not simply treated in the same way as the bathroom. The bathroom is the output room.
And it's always sort of relegated to unconsciousness because we don't like to admit that we do these things.
And so when you carry the bathroom attitude to the kitchen, as I suggested already the kitchen begins to look like a bathroom because it is just the input room.
And no real reverence is recorded to the art cooking.
Well I think that if we want to have a true civilization, we want to be people of great culture, great humanity. A lot of it begins in the kitchen.
And goes on around the eating table.
In Christianity, after all, we have the mass as a central right. The holy communion, the eating of bread and the drinking of wine, because in Mediterranean civilization at the time when Jesus lived, bread was the staple food, and wine was the staple drink.
You wouldn't drink water for God's sake, because you could never trust water. What was in it?
Therefore, if you had a certain alcoholic content in the water, it was drinkable.
But beyond that, of course, the nurture of grapes and the production of very fine, loved and matured wines was a way of bottling sunshine.
And you will find to this day that in any restaurant where wine is not served in western culture, they do not understand food.
Food and wine in the western tradition are inseparable.
And wine is not alcohol in the sense of vodka or whiskey or whatever is hard liquor.
Wine is food. And when an Italian family is asked a question there to put down what it spends on food, what it spends on drink, they will always include the wine under the food expenditure.
They don't imagine that it spent on drink.
Yes, they would say, all right, if we bought some whiskey, that would be drink, as distinct from food that wine is food.
And so it, these things blend themselves together.
And when anybody who really understands wine opens the bottle of wine, you will notice that they always do it with a certain ritualistic attitude.
They will carefully draw the cork and they will sniff the cork to see that the flavor is all right.
Then they will pour a little wine into a glass and allow it to roll around the glass.
And you should always use a rather, for table wines like carrots, burgundy, shabby, so-turn, all those wines, you should use a rather large glass.
What the French call it by law, a balloon glass, so that almost like brandy, you can catch the perfume of the wine in the glass.
And you roll the wine around and sniff it, and you may take a tiny sip to see that it's all right.
Meanwhile, the wine pours stands beside you to see if you approve, it may be yourself as host of the table.
And you put it down, and then you serve the other guests, but you don't fool it, feel this kind of glass to the top.
You fill it about one-third or one-half, so that an area is left above the wine to catch the perfume.
And then you gently savor it, you don't wolf it down in a gout.
Now you see there's a ritualistic attitude to that.
Wine is something precious and valued.
And if you follow wine and interested in it, you can learn the art, for example, of being almost blindfold.
I don't mean that literally, it's the bottle, it's blindfolded, because you need your eyes, as well as your nose and tongue, to test wines, you need to look at it.
How it brings or doesn't cling to the side of the glass, and so on.
And experts, of course, can, that guess, rather accurately, what wine they're drinking, where it's from.
It's not easy to, in fact, it's probably kind of fairytale that people can pin down the actual vineyard, just they can do so occasionally in a flukey way.
If they happen, for example, to be the manufacturer of that wine itself, they might pin down the actual vineyard.
But you see, in where wherever wine is revered, the serving of wine is attended with ritual.
Now I'm pointing out what is good cooking also is attended with ritual, because you are, as cook, a priest at an altar, and you are at a vital moment in human life.
In the point where other biological existence is, be they animal or vegetable, are being transformed, so as to enter the human system and to become us.
And so as Lin-Yutan once beautifully put it, a fish, which has died for you, and is not well cooked, has died in vain.
Here you see, we face a serious ethical problem, since we do depend on all these other creatures for our life.
What is our responsibility towards them?
You can't avoid this. You can become a vegetarian. If you're squeamish about it, but that's only a gesture.
You're still destroying living beings to eat apples, tomatoes, cabbages, lettuce, all those things, cereals, you're still destroying other forms of life.
And so the only possible good ethical response to finding ourselves in this situation is not only, of course, the obvious one of putting to good use the energies which we derive from them, but also the immediate respect.
So I say the grace, the thanksgiving of honoring what we eat by cooking it to perfection.
And perfect cooking will involve, therefore, ritual, because ritual is actually any activity whatsoever done with full attention and care.
When you watch a surgeon or even at lowly dentists at work, and he's a good surgeon or a good dentist, you will notice that he has a certain ritualistic attitude to the way he disposes his tools and to the order in which he does things.
There are certain dentists who you recognize at once as having surgeons fingers. They are loving, quiet, peace-giving fingers.
It worked with a kind of quick but unharid expertness, and you can see the same thing in a driver of a car or in any expert workman at any craft whatsoever.
And you will always see he goes about what he's doing with a certain way of behaving that is very much like the behavior of a priest at an altar.
Now, I don't know how many people know much about what priests do with all those. Even Catholics don't always know very much about this.
And they think ceremony ceremony ceremony ceremony a lot of empty gesturing, but actually the way in which a priest celebrates the mass is quite practical.
All the ceremonies connected with it were originally functional activities. Why are the candles on an altar?
We think the candle is the way of lighting a candle besides something is the way of paying respect to it.
Well, yeah, but originally one needed some light. Let's see what you were doing to read any book you might have.
And why was incense offered with all this? We think Protestants, especially, have what we call Protestant noses and find incense in church, very repugnant.
But that is all connected with our putting down of the sense of smell. This is one of the most interesting things in our culture is our repression of smell.
It tells a great deal about us. Taste depends to an enormous degree on smell. We can actually only identify four kinds of taste with a tongue.
Four dimensions of taste and the real savoring of food depends a on its texture and b on its smell.
That is when you get a very bad cold, you notice that you don't taste your food.
But yet, in the English language we have only three words to distinguish qualities of smell.
Acrid, pungent and fragrant, or other words which we use to denote smell are borrowed from other senses.
We are noseless.
Chestnut and put it in the line of one of his poems and goodness only noses the noslessness of man.
Dogs, cats, all creatures are very conscious of smell and find their way by it.
But we, when we say it's like the person who is alleged to have gotten to a coach who is Dr. Johnson, who is a mysterious lady.
Being in the 18th century when people went very fastidious about washing.
She looked at him and said, Sir, you smell.
He said, on the contrary Madam, you smell. I stink.
You see, we don't like smells.
And particularly, we don't like the smell of the human organs.
We would rather smell of disinfectant of lavores or something chemical like that than we would smell of people.
And therefore the clean, good healthy, western civilized type of persons, smells of chemicals.
That is smells like a public toilet.
Rather than smelling human.
And to be smelly, you see, is to be stinky.
It means the same thing.
And therefore curiously, the sense of smell becomes the transmission sense of the unconscious.
It becomes immensely important just because it's repressed.
And we get all kinds of messages, which, for reasons that we don't understand, influence our likes and dislikes of other people.
We like the people who smell good to us.
And dislike the people who don't smell good to us, although this never passes through conscious analysis.
In enormous amount of communication comes this way.
Memories, for example, are wonderfully evoked by smells.
All sorts of situations in childhood when we weren't so unconscious of smell.
Our evoked.
It's why we like the smell of freshly cooking coffees so much.
It reminds us of wonderful breakfasts, long ago, of home, of mother, of the kitchen.
Smells of freshly-cooking bacon, you know?
All that sort of thing goes with the smell of burning autumn leaves.
And all these really cherished smells.
And immediately evoked memories.
And that's why you see, in Buddhist and Hindu and Catholic worship, incense is used.
Because there are certain smells connected with the, shall I say, the religious consciousness, which evokes that consciousness.
And in a very, very powerful way.
And then this is the sort of mystery that goes on at altars.
Where people are doing things, that indicate basically reverence for life.
Albert Schweitzer, reverence for life.
This is the sacrificial bread and the sacrificial wine, upon which your life depends.
And therefore honor is done to it.
The Christian idea of the communion is really very, very simple.
Because the meaning of the mass, which Jesus was trying to point out, was that the Christ sacrifice was basically
the grinding up of wheat and the crushing of grapes.
The sacrifice of every living creature, which maintains the human species.
This is my body, which is given for you.
Therefore the death of all creatures, which give other creatures life, is the ongoing process of love, of self-affering,
which constitutes the very nature of the biophysical world.
And therefore if you say grace before meals, what you should really thank is the dead cow, the dead fish, or the crushed grain, which you are about to eat.
And say to this, thank you very much for allowing your life to be transformed into mine.
And so the natural outcome of grace is eventually to allow your life to be transformed into the life of other beings, still.
Be they ever so humble, be they merely bacteria or worms, because they in their turn are a sort of yeast from which life continues to go on.
So now, all those of you here who are at any time engaged in cooking must become aware of the high dignity of this art, and of the possibilities in it for yoga and self-realization.
No more must you ever throw something together to stop the knowing feeling.
There is no point whatsoever in cooking, without giving yourself adequate time for it.
Because you will find that time spent on other things, to such an extent that it affords no time for cooking, is a way of wasting your life.
On abstract fripper is, instead of things of true material consequence.
Anybody who cooks should, therefore, set aside a sufficient time of the day to do it to perfection.
There is no point in cooking, at all, unless one cooks perfectly.
Because to do anything less than that, is a serious irreverence to the fish, to the dead animals, and to the crushed grains that we use.
I don't want to sound more realistic, as if naughty naughty to be irreverent to these creatures.
I'm merely saying that if you aren't reverent towards them, you will not eat well.
Because the process of transforming these valuable living elements into great dishes is really worth it.
But the basic thing in being a good cook is that you must love the natural elements which go into it.
In other words, when you get spread out on the chopping board, various meats and vegetables, eggs and so on, you must start by feeling of love for those things.
Roll the vegetables in your hands. Look how exquisite they are. When you slice, say, a purple onion, look at the lines, the patterns, and what is then displayed.
Look at a fish laid out in front of you. The wonderful music of its scales.
What a beautiful thing it is, the way the bones are formed.
When you slice meat, look at the marbling in it, the quality, the colour, really show that, sniff all that.
And if you love those raw materials, you will be able to cook because cooking is a process of loving.
It is loving. It is a transformation through love of these raw materials into a similar and truly edible form.
And a person therefore who is engaged in the ritual of cooking will never make the mistake of hurrying.
Now there are moments in cooking where you have to have your wits about you because timing is terribly important, as in boiling and egg, as in making a souffle.
As in making certain sources, as in frying with butter where the butter has to be at a certain temperature and mustn't be allowed to burn.
Cooking certain kinds of pastry requires perfect timing, but perfect timing and hurrying are two completely different things.
Hurrying in cooking is always a failure. Instant coffee is a punishment for people who are in too much of a hurry.
There is only one way of cooking coffee, that is perfect, which is jungle coffee, where you put coffee into cold water and you will allow you, but you see you've got to watch it.
And the moment it comes to the begins to come to the boil, you turn it off. It must never boil.
And then you stir it and you put the lid back on the pan to keep the heat in and you allow a little time for the grounds to settle.
And then pour it off through a fine strainer in case any ground should be left through, and you have got absolutely perfect coffee.
But it takes your presence of mine, it takes watching to do it.
It also does boiling eggs, which is a very sufferer art, there is no formula for boiling an egg.
Because there are too many variables enter into it. What is the temperature of the egg? What is the quality of the egg?
How hot your flamens? How high you are above sea level?
When you think water begins to boil, all sorts of questions like that go into the boiling of an egg.
And no egg timer will by itself teach you to boil an egg. You have to get a feel for your own stove, for your own kitchen, for your own climate, for the kind of eggs you buy from the market.
And then eventually you will know almost instinctively how to boil an egg.
So I would say then the basic attitude is one of concentrating, not by sort of forcing your attention on things, that's not the way to concentrate.
I think the attitude of concentration is very well shown if you watch the conduct of the Japanese tea ceremony.
The whole idea of which is that the simple act of serving powdered green tea in hot water, which is whisked, can be so utterly delightful.
And the contemplation of the bowls and the bamboo instruments that are used in this procedure can give such aesthetic relish that it is worth dallying over.
And spending two or three hours just doing that. So in the same way you will find that very good cooks have extremely interesting kitchens.
That they will, for example, have the kind of kitchen where there is not one single utensil, not one jar or saucepan, which is not an object of beauty.
Such people will go out of their way to collect Mexican bowls because they are so warm feeling and lovely.
To have the most beautiful jars, for example, they will buy the wonderful jars that are made for use in labs, with the ground glass stoppers that fit very snugly, beautiful functional shapes.
They are much better than the ordinary kind of glassware for such purposes that is served in supermarkets.
Go to a lab manufacturer and buy all sorts of bottles and beautiful instruments. They are perfect for use in the kitchen.
So you find that a good cook always has an interesting and colorful kitchen, because a good cook makes the kitchen the most attractive center in the house.
A good cook will find that the company invited for dinner will tend to gravitate to the kitchen, while dinner is being prepared. This may be an embarrassment to the cook.
If you are doing something extremely complicated, which requires that you spread yourself over a quite an area and you have to move rather swiftly from part to part of the kitchen and don't want to be interrupted by conversation.
But that is true only of certain very complex dishes. Everyone who really enjoys cooking tends also to like showing off.
And to like to cook under other people's eyes, and they instinctively also like to watch it being done because it stimulates the appetite.
And therefore you ideally should have an arrangement in your home where if you don't actually live in the kitchen and have like a big farm kitchen.
It's always a good idea to have the kitchen and living area separated by a bar where the actual stove is in the bar under a suction fan.
All the people before dinner can come with their drinks and sit at the bar and watch you make things right under their noses.
And you can carry on conversation and not be separated from your guests.
This is likewise the principle of cooking, say, skiyaki, yaki-tori, tempera and all those various oriental dishes which are served at the table.
Or fondu-boginya or Swiss cheese fondu and all those things that are cooked right there.
Now, as you are of course a Cairo of beginner in the art of cooking, you will find that you depend on the recipe book on instructions as to how to go about it.
And that's quite right and proper because recipes have been worked out and tested over many hundreds of years and our things to learn from.
But as you the more you begin to understand and get a feel for cooking, the less you will need recipes.
And you will find yourself in the delightful situation of being able to invent all sorts of different meals,
where you are not following recipes but you are creating your own.
Especially is this true in the art of dealing with leftovers.
This is a real test of mastery in cooking.
A good cook should not waste anything.
She will find out how to convert all things that are left over from the kitchen into something exciting.
And that's you see a real test of your inventive genius.
And eventually you come to know in your bones, in your nerve centers and the nose, what goes with what, how to treat certain things.
And it becomes therefore increasingly difficult for you to explain to anyone else how it's done.
The Chinese Taoist book written by Johansson has a number of examples in it of the yoga of everyday life.
And two of the ones he mentions in particular are the art of the wheel right and the art of the butcher.
The wheel right is an old gentleman 70 years old who makes wheels with absolute perfection.
That do not wobble on the axle and do not grip on the axle but revolve quite evenly.
But he does not know how he does it.
He cannot explain to his son how to do it as well as he can.
Therefore still is working over 70 years old.
Then there is the butcher who uses his knife so skillfully that it hasn't been had to be sharpened in 17 years.
Because it always goes exactly through the joints in the bone.
And that which is infinitely thinning can enter where there is no space.
This is Johnson's fanciful way of putting it.
But that knife that goes wash and see and never has to go crack.
He's always in sharp form.
So in this way he says there is something incommunicable about all great arts.
He says also following his mentor Lao Dze.
The five colors make the eyes blind.
The five tones make the ears deaf.
That means.
If you think there are only five colors you are blind.
If you think there are only five tones you are deaf.
In other words let's say we have the spectrum seven colors.
The Chinese think of five.
We think of so many 12 tones in the musical scale.
But if you think there are only 12 tones you are deaf.
And so in taste in all the arts of cooking.
If you depend on the recipe you have no tongue.
You could say then in Taoist fashion recipes spoil the tongue.
That's an exaggerated way of saying something.
It's a half truth.
It's a truth that is imperfect.
But it's said that way in that violent way as it were to attract attention.
recipes are very useful.
But you will eventually come to the point where you will not be able to explain.
And therefore you get those awkward recipes where it says simply season to taste.
A pinch of this, a dollop of that.
And you don't know how big a pinch or a dollop is.
Well that's because you haven't yet developed the feel for the way in which certain ingredients will go with others.
But you will find as you cook in that attitude that you will become deeply aware of the miracle of the transformation of the world into humanity.
Through your careful administrations.
Therefore we will become more aware of your ecological going with all other forms of life.
Therefore be more fundamentally enlightened.
Well now.
Last night I was being specific about one of the yoga of everyday life and applying it to the art of cooking.
And as a concluding session I wanted to discuss the way in which consciousness of your essential oneness with this whole universe.
And what we call everyday consciousness go together.
If you read a great deal about mysticism.
You will find descriptions of ecstases.
Developed through the practice of yoga, meditation or whatever.
That seemed to be so completely absorbing in thralling, ecstatic and rapturous that you cannot conceive that anybody could be in that state of consciousness.
And at the same time carry on everyday life.
And we hear of great Hindu mystics like Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Ramana Mahashi, who spend hours and hours in stamadi.
They sit there with their eyes closed in sheer rapture out of this world altogether.
And if that is the ideal state to which man should attain that kind of contemplation.
Obviously it is inconsistent with everyday life.
But there is a strong tradition, not only in India, but also in the far east.
There is a higher state than Samadhi than Rapture.
And this much higher state is called in India, Sahaja.
S, A, H, A, J, A. And that means the natural state of the state in which illumination is quite natural.
And fits in precisely with everything in the way of ordinary consciousness.
This is very much a strong feature also of the Zen Buddhist tradition.
Where they have the saying, your ordinary mind is Buddha, or is the Tao, the way.
And in Zen, the poet Hokoji has said supernatural power and marvelous activity.
I draw water, I gather fuel.
So that, for Zen, there is no no distinction whatsoever.
Between what we would call the normal consciousness of the everyday world through our five senses,
and the supreme state of consciousness of total awakening and enlightenment.
Indeed, going back to the fundamental logic of the Upanishads, the great texts upon which all Indian wisdom is based,
they insist again and again that the supreme state is without duality.
And without duality means without exclusiveness.
They would say, for example, that to experience the highest state of consciousness is not merely to experience the oneness of things.
You would think you see, if you experienced all things as one, that somehow the differentiations which you perceive in the world outside you would disappear.
And the two would experience all around you in every direction, a uniform luminosity in which all differentiation was dissolved.
And I can assure you that would be an extremely boring state of mind to get stuck in indefinitely.
That's not what to expect.
Because the non-dual means the non-exclusive, that which does not have any opposite.
And if the ultimate reality behind this universe, the fundamental energy or essence or whatever you want to call it, has no opposite.
It is therefore not incompatible with all other states and manifestations of life.
So you could say, this supreme consciousness is much like a mirror, because a mirror is always clear and pure.
And yet it will reflect anything in front of it.
There is no incompatibility between the silver purity of the mirror and reflecting the face of a lovely girl or the dirty old astray.
It will take in both and still remain pure.
So in a rather similar way, the enlightened state of consciousness can contain any subordinate state of consciousness.
So first of all, I must give some attempt to describe what the awakened state of consciousness is like.
And this natural way is a very difficult thing to do, because it is in a way like trying to describe colour to someone who is congenitly blind.
And you have to do that by analogy.
You can tell a blind person that colour is an experience of a certain kind of variations in the world that could be likened to the variations of temperature.
We speak about hot colours and cold colours. We call red or hot colour and blue or cold colour.
And that there are vibrations in a sense that he knows nothing about these variations and their characteristic of all sorts of things.
But he must not confuse what we call colour with what he experiences as hot and cold. It's only like it.
It's a little bit like that, you see, to have to describe a novel state of consciousness.
And in a way it's more difficult than that. For the simple reason that the consciousness of the total unity or non-duality of the universe is not really like having acquired an additional sense.
Because it comes through all one senses.
It is very much like a sensation. It's more like a sensation than it is like anything else. It's more like a sensation than it's like an idea.
Because it's very concrete, very unnestakable, the moment you slip into it.
And I don't doubt that there are a number of people in this room who have at one time or another, slipped into it.
It happens quite commonly in adolescence. And again, in the dangerous forties, people are labelled, have spontaneous mystical experiences.
And sometimes in childhood, others of you may have come into this by discipline or by LSD or something of that kind.
And so you'll know what I'm talking about.
Although you must not, if you experiment with these things, you must not confuse what I would call visionary states with the state of enlightenment.
They are quite different. Visionary states are when you experience overwhelming light or receive great mandalas.
And sort of have visions of the cosmos and total harmony.
They are not quite at the state of what would it call satory.
Because there's nothing about it which is so to say visionary.
It doesn't consist in seeing any particular forms or visions that you can specify.
Satory, which is the Zen word and Japanese for awakening, is just exactly like what you're feeling now.
Except that a Suzuki wants to put it. It's about two inches off the ground.
That is to say, you feel that the same old world that you see outside you is not outside you, but is you.
In other words, the trees waving across the swimming pool and the flowers blooming red, the sunlight playing on the water.
The people sitting in the room and all that, you know that that's just as much you as your own body.
And you don't therefore defend yourself against it, you don't resist it.
It's all you.
And you are therefore doing all those things out there, only are not doing it as we say we do voluntary acts,
but we're doing it in the same way that we grow our hair or breathe or beat our hearts.
And so you feel all this as the functioning of your own self.
Simply that the whole of experience is one single process, unified process.
And there is no differentiation between the experiences going on and the one who experiences them.
You are what you are experiencing that becomes absolutely clear.
And this, as I say, it reduces the resistance factor that ordinarily exists between the experience and the experience, the feeler and the feeling, the thinker and the thought.
That disappears.
You are no longer standing back and looking at a panorama of events going on as if you were outside it.
You know, for example, that what you see outside and in front of you is actually located inside your head.
The optic nerves are in the back of the head.
And so all the colours and all the shapes that you are aware of with your eyes are in here.
They are you, because you know the external world, only by translating yourself into it.
Or translating it into yourself. There is no other way of knowing it. It has to become you for you to know it.
And when you follow that out, you find out that, of course, the external world exists in relation to you and you exist in relation to it.
In the same sort of way that a back is related to a front. They are inseparable.
And without one you don't have the other.
I don't care which one you take away, take away the external world, the individual vanishes, take away the individual, the external world vanishes.
There must in other words be some individuals, some living being around, for there to be an external world at all.
Just as if you slap a drum which has no skin, it makes no noise.
Because noise is the relationship between the hand and the drum skin.
And the hand can hit as hard as hard can be and there will be no sound.
And if the drum skin doesn't have anything to hit it, it still won't make a noise.
You have to have both.
So all over this universe, the universe is called into being by individuals in it.
It does not exist except in relationship to perceiving individuals.
Because everything that exists is relational.
You can only establish movement that is energy.
If there is a relationship between a body in motion and a body at rest.
And that's what the whole thing is, the whole thing is relationship.
Relationship is existence.
And relationship between either Noah and the known, still in the moving is a polar relationship.
Polarity means that the opposites, whether we call them to be and not to be or alive and dead or light and dark, or north and south, opposites, always imply a unity between them.
Just as the magnet is the solid unity that lies between north and south poles.
Just as the coin is the unity between heads and tails.
Just as a sheet of paper is the unity between back and front.
So in the same way there is a unity of the organism and the environment, the Noah and the known.
And without this polarizing unity there is nothing happening, nothing doing.
So this is what you become aware of.
You see absolutely vividly that the differentiations that you notice between solids and spaces between different spectra of colour,
between form, between figure and ground, all these differentiations you are normally aware of.
You experience as not separating things but rather joining.
The differences show the unity.
And therefore don't expect in the state of Satori everything to dissolve into uniform light or something like that.
They stay just as they are.
But you hear and see everything in a state of golessness.
Where every inside goes with its outside.
Where every eye goes with every though.
Where you see that at this moment everything that comes to you is your own doing.
Or as Hindus would say your own colourma.
Your own doing.
That doesn't mean your fate is if someone else was putting it over on you.
It doesn't mean your reward or your punishment.
It simply means your own doing.
Because you feel the different sense of you, what you are, the ordinary limited ego sense.
In which you feel that you are a separate part of the world, accepting or rejecting things that are going on elsewhere.
You are doing it all.
Only be very careful at this point that you don't get into the state which you call inflation.
It's very easy for a Westerner to get into an inflated state about this.
Because of our conception of God as the governor of the universe, the political governor of the universe.
It's a supreme monarchy.
And then as a result of that, if an individual feels that he is really doing the whole thing and is therefore one with God,
he's apt to give himself as in graces and to feel that he is really personally in charge of everything that's going on.
And people who get that kind of sensation and interpret it in that way are rather unacceptable socially.
And we usually regard them as crazy.
Well that's because they make a God of their ego instead of an ego of their God.
They identify the limited ego with the whole universe.
In such a way as to say, I could change it if I wanted to.
I could, on the prompting of an egocentric whim, show off in some way or other by turning the water in the swimming pool into champagne.
But when you have the Hindu idea of God, you simply say naturally one doesn't turn the water into champagne.
Because it is the will of God that it be water.
And you feel that the center of yourself is no longer in this superficial wishing faculty that we call the will.
Although it's still you, you discover that you run a great deal deeper than your own will, your conscious will.
You have of course an unconscious will.
We know that fundamentally from all that we've done in the West in psychotherapy.
People's, we talk about people's unconscious wishes, unconscious drives.
And of course all that exists and that is you at a deeper level than you normally know.
So what has happened in this process is that you have discovered you have centered yourself at your own deepest level.
Instead of centering yourself as it were somewhere out on the circumference of a wheel, you found your center at the hub.
And you have therefore to find the hub of your own organism, where do you take from?
Well from the hub, but the hub is not ordinarily the conscious center from which you operate.
But as you see you try the experiments I've been discussing, as you try trusting your own brain to decide what to do, as you try trusting your own nature,
and following your own natural grain, shall I call it that?
You will very soon come to act from your deepest center.
And you will at first get the impression that what goes on is puts you in a passive position.
You seem at first to get the idea that you are relaxing to a current, to a life motion above and beyond yourself, or deeper than yourself,
or analogy you want to use. Sometimes we say that the great thoughts are lofty.
Sometimes we say they are profound. There are two opposite metaphors.
But whether you want to call it high or deep, it doesn't matter.
The point is you feel at first that you are responding to something in you, but other than you, a beyond within.
But later on you discover that this isn't other, it's simply you at its deepest level.
And you don't feel exactly passive about it. That's what you feel at first, is if you were being carried by a great stream,
as if you were responding to a current of air like a leaf.
But later on that duality between the source and the one who responds disappears, and it all becomes a single activity.
And the fascinating thing about it is that you realize there is no way of doing it any other way.
You can be under the illusion that you are opposing this energy, which we will call you if you say the Chinese name, the Tao, the course of nature.
And you can be under the illusion that you are acting against it.
That by your ego's centricity you somehow create waves in the thing that shouldn't be there.
But you can't. There is absolutely no way of going against the Tao.
You can imagine that you are against it, because the Tao is complex enough that within its possibilities, it includes imagining that you're going against it.
That's all part of the game.
But actually you can't. There is no state of mind you can get into it. There is no kind of consciousness, no kind of emotion.
Whatever that will actually go against it.
Now that's the important thing to understand.
As you come to the point of realizing that there is just no way out of this story.
Then you understand it, because you don't look upon it. Then as something you can get, that is to say as some particular state of mind,
happy mood, peaceful mood, as distinct from sad mood, depressed mood or anything.
It isn't some particular state of mind that you can acquire and make the object of an ambition.
To the degree that you are ambitious to change your state of consciousness by any means whatsoever,
whether it's yoga, whether it's drugs, whether it's search, I don't care what it is, prayers, anything.
So long as you're ambitious for another state of consciousness, then the one you have now, you can't get this thing,
because you can't get it.
Buddha's explained in the Diamond Sutra.
Oh, Subhuti, when I attained unsapast complete awakening, I attained nothing whatsoever.
And there was no one to attain it.
This is trying to say, what I'm trying to say, and I may be fumbling in my words about this,
but when you understand that there is nothing to be attained.
Just as I was explaining last night, there is no way of being secure of stopping the process of change and transformation,
which we call life and death.
There is no way of separating yourself from the whole field of universal process.
So, as you understand that there is nothing to be attained, and that's the whole point of this thing.
Then you see, as a kind of your mind as a flip, that flip is called Satori, you see that everything is it.
And therefore, you can within that understanding, live your everyday life.
You are, as it were, set free to forget about religion and concentrate on anything you want to concentrate on.
But the curious thing is that in the moment when you see there's nothing to get, nothing to attain,
there's no special state of consciousness, your mind ought to be in.
How much you see that? There is something in a way added to you.
It is different. It's not the same as you were in before, and also it's not another.
That's the hard thing to explain. One can use analogies and say that it's like you became aware that the moon is three-dimensional,
instead of a flat plate in the sky. You see what you always saw, but you suddenly understand that it's three-dimensional.
But still in the same way, more or less the same way, you see all that you ordinarily see,
but you see the new dimension, and it's you see that it's all you.
And that nothing, and not even unconsciousness or death makes the slightest difference to that.
In fact, death becomes an extremely important way of understanding this. Think about death.
Imagine the end of consciousness. Imagine going to sleep and never never waking up again.
Consider that, you see, carefully.
Well, you very soon have to think about going to sleep and waking up, never waking up.
It occurs to you that when you were born, you woke up without ever having gone sleep.
And you realize then that the state after death and the state before birth of the same state.
They are the off period that polarizes with the on period when you know something is happening.
There is knowledge when there is feeling, when there is vibration.
Obviously, if there is going to be, if we're going to realize that there is something called is,
we can only do so in contrast with the is not.
And so let go, let go, don't resist this thing.
You don't need to ensure that you will survive death.
Just let it happen.
Because life, death, life, death is the pulsing of the energy which you are.
You really want to die. That's why you die.
That's the truth in Freud's idea of a death wish.
You like you want to go to sleep.
You may try to resist it with this part of yourself.
But basically you want to go to sleep.
And you want in the most deep sense in the sense of karma.
You want everything that happens to you.
Because it's all your situation and your scene.
So, in coming to understand this,
you might say to me, well, you've made a lot of statements about this kind of consciousness.
But I really don't see that they mean anything, because it doesn't really make any difference.
Anybody who analyzes this sort of thing logically,
anybody who takes a logical approach to mysticism will come to the conclusion
that the mystics are talking a lot of nonsense.
Because what difference does it make?
Now it's perfectly true that this is not exactly logical.
If I say all things are the manifestations of a single energy,
they would say, all you're really doing is you're making a statement about all things.
And you can't make a statement about all things.
Because any one thing that is true of all things will be meaningless.
It's like adding a number, the same number or the same letter to both sides of an equation.
It makes no difference.
I say everything in the world is moving slightly up.
You will ask up with respect to what?
And since there isn't anything else but everything,
I can't locate that relative point in respect to which everything is moving up.
So they would say in the same way, if I say everything is divine
or everything is a manifestation of the doll, it would say,
well, you've said it about everything, and therefore you've said it about nothing.
Well, I can't help it.
That may be true from a logical point of view, but nevertheless,
when you'll experience this to be so, it makes a great deal of difference.
It's a shattering experience.
That absolutely, sometimes it makes the sweat pour out of you.
It's so startling.
And can make you jump for joy.
Absolutely total delight.
And so I have difficulty in explaining that logically.
But that's what you see.
You see, as we say in our weak words, it's all one.
It doesn't make any difference.
And what this does, it has a very, very marked psychological effect,
because it immediately cuts down the resistances you put up all the time.
And it frees your psychic energy to do all sorts of things
that you don't normally have energy for at all.
Because you wasted in fighting your experience,
the thinker fighting his thoughts.
The thinker is the thoughts who's going to fight it.
Show me you.
That's always the question of the Zen teacher.
You say you have problems.
You say you confront a world which is threatening to you.
Show me you.
Bring me out the separate you that has these experiences.
And of course the more you look for the separate you, you can't find it.
You go on round and around and around and say, who is myself?
Where did I start all this?
You can't find it.
Because you can't.
Because there is no separate you.
The quality you see, you say, you look at something else.
Some one else.
But you see the color of the other person's face.
The color of another person's eyes when you look at them.
That is the same as you.
There would be no such things as eyes and no such thing as color,
except in terms of you.
So wherever you look, you are looking at the real you.
There is no observer separate from the color of somebody else's eyes.
Do you see that?
You see, we come from a scientific point of view.
Dissect brains and say, well, there is this nervous system and there is that nervous system
and there is the other nervous system.
When they get into contact with each other, they reflect each other like mirrors, you see.
But the guy who is saying this and analyzing it all out is in a certain relationship
himself with all these separate brains he is looking at and plotting out.
And he can never unstick that relationship.
That is a scientist noted day.
They talk about the myth of the independent observer.
There is no such thing because every time you make an observation,
you interfere with what you are observing by making the observation.
You can't unstick yourself.
You can't disentangle yourself from the total web that is this universe.
And say to stand aside from it and observe it as if you were an outsider is ridiculous.
And the reason why is it you?
All study of nature is simply self observation.
Only it's you in a much greater sense than we ordinarily give to this word.
We ordinarily give to the word I, the sense of something that is an independent observer.
But the I which is actually operative is in no way different from what it's looking at.
The Iness of you, if I look around with you and I want to find myself as you and in you.
Well, you have dark hair, you have blonde hair and in the blonde color and in the dark color, that's me.
In other words, we are in a situation where we are mutually vitalizing each other.
It isn't that I'm in this body or the only one that's real.
But we are all shall we say, tits on one's bow.
We are all raised from one center.
And mutually calling each other into being, like the back and the front, the mutual aspects of the coin or the sheet of paper.
And in this relationship, of course, everyone is necessary.
Everyone is an essential part of the whole goings on.
Even if your bodily appearance is only very brief, that brief bodily appearance is an essential part of the eternal universe.
And the eternal universe could not exist without it.
So just as a big weight can hang on us in rope.
So eternity can hang on a tiny short time.
So now this is very important to understand in a time when an enormous number of people
are interested in the mystical experience and are using every conceivable means to try to get there.
Although I don't deny the value of all yogas and all specific ways of approach,
whether they be the meditation exercises in the old fashioned way or whether they be the use of psychedelic chemicals.
These all have their value, but you finally have to understand that this state of consciousness is not something to be attained because you have it.
You're always there.
Only you need some sort of a joke to see that.
And so often it is the meditation exercise or the upaya we call these various means.
The upaya means a strategy.
It divides a gimmick.
And there are these various means to jolt us into understanding that we were there all the time.
That it isn't anything special.
There's a phrase that's used in Zen of this kind of consciousness called in Chinese Wusha
or in Japanese budji.
You can probably remember budji more easily than Wusha.
But it means nothing special.
It also means no fast.
It can mean no business since it's a busyness.
And a person who is shall we say perfectly religious is Wusha
that means he doesn't look as if he's religious.
He fits into the landscape.
Not compulsively.
I mean it's not like the kind of person who is self-effacing out of timidity.
When necessary the person who is in the state of Satori can come on very strong
or suddenly vanish and leave no trace at all.
It isn't that you feel a compulsion to be modest.
It's rather that you feel the incredible richness of the world as you are experiencing it now.
Because that's the point.
Let me try and put it in some other ways.
Because perhaps through talking about it from different points of view,
I strike a bell of recognition in someone.
It's often said that one of the great ways of yoga,
and this is particularly applicable to the everyday yoga,
the yoga of cooking, the yoga of accounting, or whatever it may be.
That you concentrate in the present.
Some of you who've read the writings of Gorgia,
have read about the self-remembering exercise,
where you are vividly aware of everything you do all the time.
That it is happening now.
You live in present time.
That's one of these exercises.
It's very interesting exercise.
Always be alert.
Are you here and now, or are you wandering?
You're thoughts of somewhere else, you see?
Are you completely with what you're doing?
Because naturally, when one is engaged in something very important,
like a surgical operation, you have to be completely with it.
Now, what do you do everything that way?
Do you eat your breakfast that way?
You may glove that way.
See, are you absolutely with it?
So this meditation exercise is practiced in being completely with it.
Now, the funny thing is that the end of this exercise is the discovery
that you can't be in any other state of consciousness than that one.
Because everything you're conscious of, in any way, is the present.
The memory of the past is the present.
It's like an echo of something that happened a few seconds ago.
The echo goes on.
And the echo is here, and the echo is the memory of the noise.
And your brain is full of echoes, but they're all present.
There is no way of being anywhere else than the here and now.
But that's what you find and discover through trying to get into it.
You have to try to get into the eternal now to realize that there's nowhere else to be.
And you do that, you see by analyzing, by carefully watching what you're doing,
and you discover that your memory is, and your distractions, your thoughts about the future,
your thoughts about the past, they're all happening now.
I am thinking about the past.
I am anticipating the future.
And that's what I'm doing.
Then really do it. You see, get with it.
Get with thinking about the future.
Get with thinking about the past, and you'll find it's all present.
Now then, this is a marvelous feeling when you catch this.
You feel that the present moment is like a great stream that's carrying you long.
See, how can you get out of the present moment? Just try.
Can you avoid it? Can you be somewhere else? No.
Well, if you see the present moment as the same thing as Satori.
You see what I mean? That's the present moment.
There's now that is somehow always still, and yet always moving.
That is the dowel. That's God. That's eternal now.
Eternal life. And you can't get away from it.
Just try. Pull against it, push against it, shove against it, try and search yourself against it.
There's no way of doing it.
And therefore, I can use this image, the symbol of the present moment,
as a way of illustrating what this kind of consciousness is like.
Other people might use the symbol of space.
That's often used when the Chinese word, for Shunyata, Sanskrit term for the great void,
which is the ultimate reality they use the word, the original meant sky or space.
And just as you can't get out of the present moment,
you realize that everywhere in all directions, you're contained by space.
And space, what is space? Space is your own mind.
Everything that you are aware of occurs in space.
And let's first of all relate space to the eyes.
Space, are those areas of the retina, not being stimulated by something.
And therefore, it constitutes the background for every visible form.
Space is the groundwork of optics.
Let's consider it from the standpoint. Let's consider space from the standpoint of hearing.
It's the silence in your ears.
Against which you hear sounds and can distinguish them.
Let's consider space from the sense of touch.
It's where you move your hands in the dark and meet no obstruction.
And you have a kinesthetic sense of space in that way.
But space is fundamentally the end-globing background to all specific sensations.
So there's visual space, auditory space, tactile space.
Probably there's all factory space, but as I said, that's a sense for which we don't have any words.
A smelllessness against which you distinguish particular smells.
But that space is the way in which we experience the availability of our consciousness for particular sensations.
It is the room in consciousness for this and for that.
So everything that you experience is space, vast, vast outgoing space to the limits of the universe.
That's simply you. That's your mind.
And just as every point in the universe, because it's a curved space-time continuum,
maybe regarded as the center of the universe.
So every living being, maybe regarded as the center of the universe, the center of space,
which is, as it were, multi-centred.
It's easy to think about that mathematically, but difficult to think about it in sort of ordinary three-dimensional terms.
So then, you may form the impression that I'm saying,
just as I can't get out of the present moment, and I'm always moving with it.
Therefore, the dowel is something to which I am related in a deterministic way.
My ego then becomes nothing more than a puppet, which is pushed around by the great energy of nature.
And all I do is sort of dangle on the end of it right along, again, like the leaf on the wind.
So let me remind you that that image of the leaf on the wind or of the person floating in the stream is only analogy,
that what I'm trying to say is that the leaf is the wind.
There is no nothing in this universe, which is being moved by something else called the cosmic energy or God.
All these things that appear to be being moved by it are it.
It's just like you have to difficulty in understanding that a pattern can exist without being made of some substance.
That the pattern is the same thing as for substance.
When you, for example, touch anything solid.
You say, well, I feel that I am touching something substantial.
But what is happening, what that feeling is is a pattern.
The sense that you call hard is just say for the argument, it's dig dig dig dig dig in contrast.
This is the thing from dig dig dig dig dig, which would be what we call soft.
There are all sensations whatsoever.
It's pattern.
Different kinds of patterns.
And therefore, there is no substance involved in this.
The pattern isn't made of something as we would think that a pattern of wire had to be made of metal.
Because when we analyze metal and what we mean by metal, it's a pattern.
Only it's on a smaller scale than what we call wire.
There is nothing else but pattern.
Now there's a certain difficulty to our common sense in seeing that.
We say, you can't have a pattern unless it's made of something.
So in this, but in the exactly the same way, there is not the universal energy of something distinct from.
Some stuff behind out of which mental pieces and people and birds and trees are shaped.
Like we make so many carvings out of wood.
It isn't like that.
It is that these shapes are the energy.
There's no duality at all.
So when you feel this, you will, as I said, a little while ago at first, feel passive.
Because you're not used to it.
And the initial impression is monoposivity.
But the thing you actually get onto is there's no difference between the energy and you.
Or between what happens and what makes it happen.
It's all one.
Things are not forced to happen.
Unless you insist on abstracting the thing away from the totality.
When you do that, you say, what makes the thing behave the way it does?
Will you answer your own question?
Because you asked the wrong question in the beginning.
You started by falsely separating it from what goes on.
Then forget you done that and then say, well, what makes it behave the way it does?
You created the problem by making the separation.
As soon as you divide the universe into a lot of separate things and think about them that way, then you have the problem.
How do they fit together?
Or it was you who took them apart.
So the answer to how do things fit together is simply to become a question.
How did you take them apart?
Why did you analyze the universe into a lot of separate behaviors?
Well, it became convenient to do that in order to talk about them.
That's calculus.
Calculus analyzes curves into a point instance.
The curves don't come that way, but you think about them that way.
And if you forget that that is the technique of thought, the methodology of thought, then you create all kinds of false problems.
How did what is the meaning of life?
How did this universe come into existence, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera?
The answer is it didn't come into existence sometime off in the past.
You don't make came into existence now.
This is the point when the universe comes into existence.
And what we call the past is its wake, its echo, reverberation, like the wake of the ship.
The wake starts from the nose, the bow of the ship.
That's where the wake is created.
So in the same way this whole cosmos is created from this point called here and now.
This is the point of the big band.
Everybody's looking backwards to try and find out when it's started.
You don't look backwards to find out. You look in here to find out.
See, it's your if it's starting it now.
It's all flowing out from your consciousness.
Only because you don't know that and you've forgotten it.
You're looking back behind you and saying,
Hmm.
What now I got involved in all this?
Maybe it was my father and mother.
Maybe their father and mother and go back.
You pass the buck and the blame for everything.
All along the line.
See?
Ha ha!
You're looking in the wrong direction.
So you're starting it now.
Generating all this.
The past is just echoes of what you did before.
Roll you were your father.
Ha ha!
Their father's mothers and so on all the way back.
Same old you.
Like, you know, when you're my father's still alive,
he says his name's I.
And he feels central just the same way I feel central.
He'll seize all the world going on around him.
He'll just like just the way I feel.
Well, it's the same fellow, you see.
Only doubling up looking at everything from all sorts of different points of view.
And so long as you feel that way,
you are the here and now,
you are the point from which creation begins.
Beautiful.
