When I talk in academic and scientific circles about mystical experience, I have to
be very careful of my terminology, and so I alter the phrase mystical experience and
call it ecological awareness, because it really amounts to the same thing, but the terminology
is much more acceptable in the scholarly environment, because after all mysticism is a dirty
word, associated with myst and vagueness.
On the other hand, there is this difficulty that in our universities today, ecology has
not quite come of age as a science, although its importance is vastly recognised.
Theology being the science which studies the relationship between organisms and their
environments is a multidisciplinary science, and therefore its existence on any campus
today runs a foul of the departmental politics.
You notice you see that all our universities are based on the idea that there are departments
of knowledge, and if you trace the history of universities over several centuries, you
will see that the classification of departments keeps changing.
There was a time in the Middle Ages when, for example, theology was the queen of the sciences.
Therefore had high rank as a department, as today the department of physics or chemistry
would have.
But now it is almost completely disappeared.
There is a department, or yes, maybe, of the history of religions which occupies and
obscure set of rooms in the philosophy building or something like that, which is way off
at the edge of the campus.
But you cannot keep these departments fixed, because as between, say, biology and physics,
we develop a science of biophysics.
As between biology and chemistry, we develop a science of biochemistry.
As between physics and mathematics, we get mathematical physics.
As between physics and astronomy, we get astrophysics.
And the formations keep changing, and this has very difficult political consequences, for
the simple reason that the faculty members and chairman of departments are jealous of their
positions.
And they are always apt to say when these new hybrid departments start out, that these
people are dabblers.
In other words, they should get a thorough grounding in biology, zoology, but in a bacteria
allergy, and all those separate departments before they should dare venture into such a
thing as ecology, which involves all those different sciences and more.
What is not generally understood, however, is the most peculiar thing, and very difficult
to explain.
In the academic world, you know how students have to go through prerequisite courses.
They're supposed to take this before they take that.
Well, it's being found out increasingly that this is completely unnecessary, that for
some reason, as time goes on, students develop the ability to absorb the bodies of knowledge
for which it was thought they had no prerequisites.
In the same way, let's say, in the childhood of anybody now aged roughly 50, it was very
difficult to understand Einstein's theory of relativity, and we always had to have a demonstration
on a blackboard and all sorts of diagrams.
But now young people get this idea instantly, they have no difficulty in absorbing it anymore,
then we had difficulty in absorbing the notion that the earth was spherical.
We were no longer embarrassed, our common sense was no longer offended by the thought that people
living in the antipadies would be hanging upside down.
In this sort of way, common sense, a feeling for knowledge adjusts itself, and more and more
it becomes obvious that there have to be ways of linking together the departments of knowledge.
It's almost as if the established departments like physics, chemistry, history, anthropology,
and so on were like huge paving stones, and it's always between the paving stones, the little
things begin growing.
So the growing edge is in the entestices between the departments.
Now therefore ecology becomes of absolutely primary importance in the modern world, because
as so many of us have often said, Western man is equipped with technical powers such as
have not been seen in known history, and is using those powers to alter his environment.
But doing it in a way and in a spirit that may instead of altering the environment merely
destroyed, what I call Los Angeles in instead of civilization is taking over, and we are
fouling our own nest, and therefore I approached this whole matter because of my interest in the
Chinese and Japanese philosophy of nature, wherein there is not this sense of hostility between
the human organism and its environment, but rather a sense of being one with it and collaborating
with it. And thus it's been my particular interest to see in what way this far eastern attitude to
nature based originally on the philosophy of Taoism is applicable in a technological civilization.
Because there is one school of thought which says of course, we've got to press technological
progress as far as possible, and we therefore get a proliferation of so-called growing communities
which are very evident here in California, and remind some of us of the growth of cancer cells
rather than the growth of anything of a biologically healthy nature. And this is called progress,
and people say you can't stop progress, don't be sentimental. And on the other hand, there are
the people who really do want to stop this, and I find that through some considerable extent
among young people who shall I say digging the dropout scene, there is a very definite
wish to, as it were, join the American Indians to get rid of concrete, to go back to green grass,
as Gary Snyder put it the other day. When you want to go from Sossalito to Big Sir,
don't take the freeway, don't even take the side roads, find an old trail and walk it,
because the journey will be worth taking them, and he feels for example that all the
state park ranges should visit themselves with opening up trails, so that more and more young people
can walk, and have stations a days walk apart, where they can rest for the night, or whether
a congenial farmers and friendly people with homes who will accommodate them, and so we will set up
is it where a whole network of communications and culture entirely apart from the freeways and the
suburban subtopia that sprawls all over the place, because like any good Indian, American Indian that
is, they sit around waiting and watching, as they know that one of these days this whole industrial
civilization is just going to disappear into gas, and we'll leave them as they were in the beginning.
You see these are two completely extreme points of view, and I want to explore rather the
possibility that there is a middle way, that the technology is not a purely unnatural manifestation,
that it is a perfectly proper development of human capacities, but that it has to be used in the
right spirit, and with the right care, in such a way that we do not disturb irremediably what
I call the balances of nature. But the idea that there are balances of nature, that no species,
for example, should get so out of handers to become top species, and really dominate all the
others as human beings are trying to do. Goes back of course to the fundamental Chinese notion
of nature as the balancing of two forces, call the Yang and the Yin, or in Japanese in Yor.
The whole of the book of changes, which is a very, very ancient text, fundamental to Chinese ways
of thinking into Chinese logic, is based on an analysis of the processes of nature in terms
of the relative balancing of these forces. Perhaps forces is not quite the right word.
It is you see obvious to a Taoist, to Buddhists, to Hindus, that this universe is a single
system of energy. But there is no way of defining and putting your finger on that particular one
energy, and even energy is not quite the right word to use, because energy indicates something
in motion, and we do not know or realize motion except in relation to stillness and vice versa.
So whatever energy stillness is fundamentally, cannot be thought about, defined, or talked about
in any way. It is basic to everything that we both experience and don't experience.
It bears somewhat the same relation to our everyday life, as the diaphragm in a loud speaker bears
to all the sounds that you hear on the radio. Every sound of the human voice of all kinds of
musical instruments of airplanes, of automobiles, or so on. Anything you can hear on the radio
is actually the vibration of a diaphragm. But the radio does not proclaim this fact.
The announcer does not come on first thing in the morning and say, all the sounds that you will
hear after hear our vibrations of a diaphragm, including the sound, and not the actual wind in
musical instruments, and then human vocal chords. No, because wherever any circumstance is constant,
we tend in the course of time to ignore it. We rule it out of all practical politics, because it
is basic to everything. It says in an equation, when you get two terms that are identical on
either side of the equation, you can just cancel them out, they make no difference.
But in a way, this is a very difficult point, because obviously it is highly important that the
diaphragm be there, because otherwise there wouldn't be any voices or any music. And yet, the
diaphragm as such makes no difference to the distinctions between voices and musical instruments
and so on. From a logical point of view, it is absolutely meaningless to talk about anything
which is common to everything, which is the substratum or ground of being. But the categories of
logic do not embrace all knowledge. And it is possible for human beings once again to become
aware in a certain way of this substratum. Not however as an object, not as something you can
take out and look at, but nevertheless to be very strongly and almost sensuously aware of it.
And in so doing regain a new sense of one's own identity, one's own being.
Not as one of many things, one little event among many events that are all coming and going
and temporary, but a sense of one's actual self as being, this single energy field, which can't
be however defined or identified and through realizing that, to take away the frantic anxiety that
we have, to secure ourselves as separate organisms and to fight with other organisms and play these
elaborate games of one's ownership and above all, to overcome the anxiety which leads us
to regard nature itself as our enemy that has to be conquered and subjugated.
I shall of course return in later sessions to the nature of this realization.
But I only want to say in passing that there's a very peculiar thing about it.
Namely that the realization I'm speaking of is not something like a belief.
It is not an idea for the simple reason that the fundamental energy of the universe cannot be embraced
in an idea. It cannot be embraced in a concept, in a form of words, in an explanation,
because it eludes all classification, because it is the witch that there is no witcher and therefore
is not in any class. Secondly, if you try to catch hold of it and somehow possess it,
you are doing what is called in Zen, putting legs on a snake, because there is no need to possess it.
You are it and if you try to possess it, you imply that you're not.
So by trying to catch hold of it, you as it were pushed it away, although you can't really
push it away, because the very pushing is all it, you see. So there are people who are divided into
two schools of thought, those who believe that by exerting their energies to get hold of it,
they can achieve something and the opposite people who think that by doing nothing at all,
one achieves it. But both are wrong because both the attempt to get it and the attempt to try not to
get it are actually attempts to get it. And there is no need to. But nevertheless,
by going into this, by meditation and so on, it is possible to realize that we are identical
with the fundamental energy of the universe, that that is our real self, and although it
doesn't make a difference, because all differences are in a way made by it. Therefore, it makes
no difference, the difference is. Nevertheless, it is completely basic. You see, it is as if what has
happened to us is, exposing your gambler and you have got involved in a game where you are playing
actually for peanuts, and you are immensely wealthy. When you get extremely absorbed in the game,
even though you are only playing for peanuts, you can lose your temper, and you can be anxious as to
who is going to win, who is going to lose my peanuts, you see, whereas you really have nothing
to worry about at all, but you have got so absorbed in the details of this game that you have forgotten
the larger context in which the game is happening. So, and exactly the same way, every individual
is so absorbed, my opically with his mind, in the details of his birth and death, that he is completely
forgotten the context in which birth and death is occurring. And so, just as the chicken, when you put
his beak to a chalk line, can't get off it in his hypnotized. So, we have been systematically
and progressively hypnotized by our whole upbringing into the sensation that we are only this particular
ego in this body, and we believe that and feel it so firmly that the context in which all this
has happened is completely repressed. Now, therefore, I want to propose a few things first of
all in thinking about this, and I would ask you to listen to what I have to say, temporarily
postponing the question, what are the practical consequences? What should we do about it?
I want to start with a consideration of our ancient ideas about the relation of the individual
to the world in terms of fate and free will or determinism and free will, because if we actually
were aware of all the information that is coming to us through our senses, we would have a
very curious sensation which would bug us because we wouldn't be able to find words for it.
It would be like this. You would first of all realize that if you didn't be self-selective,
in other words, if you didn't pay attention to this detail and that detail, but we're just simply
aware of it all in general, you would get the funny feeling in the first place that you were just
a puppet, that you were automatically responding to all kinds of physical and social influences around
you, and that you couldn't help yourself. You might object to that, or you might alternatively
enjoy it. You might get a sensation that you were just floating, you didn't have to do anything,
you didn't have to think about any problems, you didn't have to worry about what you want to do,
you would just feel yourself responding, and that would be a very pleasant feeling if you liked it.
But on the other hand, depending on your personal constitution, you might feel terribly threatened
by it, and you would interpret this sensation as a feeling of unreality. Have you ever suddenly
felt that you were dreaming every day life? Did it wasn't quite real? And it spoke to you?
You said, gee, it ought to be happening, see? And I feel I'm going around in the dream.
Because occasionally, our mind slips, is it's like the tuning dial of a radio,
it occasionally wanders off and you get another station, and so in the same way our minds occasionally
slip into another way of seeing things, and people get accidental illuminations and psychosis and all sorts of
many things. But you would get this as a preliminary sensation, and you would interpret it as
feeling that you are a puppet on the end of strings being manipulated by events. Only because of
your previous background wherein we have all of us been conditioned to believe that part of our
life is not under our control, and part of it is, there is this distinction between the voluntary
and the involuntary. The voluntary, what we do, the involuntary, what we have to accept passively.
The borderline between them is not at all clear. Breathing, for example, is something we have to go on
doing, and yet you can acquire the sensation that you are doing the breathing and controlling it
according to your will. It's a very vague distinction here, but if you took in all the information,
see, you can feel yourself making a decision out of the blue, you say, I'm going to do that,
like that, you see, and you don't have any awareness of anything that leads up to it. It just happens,
you see, and because that awareness is screened out, you interpret this act of making a decision
as a different kind of act from breathing or from growing hair. Well, actually, it isn't different,
but we think it's different because of an awareness. When you make a decision, it happens,
as the Chinese say Ziran, she's in, of itself, naturally, spontaneously. But we feel that there
are things that happen of themselves in contrast to certain things that I do, and that is because
of incomplete awareness. But then, if that awareness were to change, and you were to realize that
everything is happening of itself, including your decisions. Because of your background, you would then
veer over to the opposite point of view, everything is happening involuntarily, and I am left out.
I'm a puppet. I simply have to obey, you see. But this would be incorrect. The point is rather this.
We don't have a system of nature, which is either deterministic or volentristic.
The relationship of the individual to the environment is not one of the individual as some little thing
in the environment, which is moved by the environment and responds to the environment pathively.
Nor, obviously, do we have a situation in which the individual is a center of activity that all of
its own to some extent, altars and changes the environment. Both of these opinions are based on
lack of awareness or ignorance, ignorance, that the behavior of the individual and the behavior
of the environment are the same process. And you can look at the process from two points of view.
You can look at it from the point of view of its all happening to me, or you can look at it from the
point of view. I'm doing it. These are just two poles of two ways of looking at the same thing.
If, for example, you realize that your neurological organization is creating the external world.
In other words, there is no such thing as light, weight, heat, color, shape, except in terms of the human
nervous system or any other animal nervous system. Then from that point of view, you can see your
nervous system as evoking the whole universe. But you can take an opposite point of view, which is
equally true, which is that the human nervous system is something in the external world and is entirely
dependent on the sun and air and light and temperature and so on and so forth. Both points of
you are true, but we have not yet, especially in the West, become aware of a logic which can
integrate them. And so when we first come to experience this thing as being so, we attempt to
interpret it in terms of our old logic and our old ways of thinking, so that one person may say on
feeling this, I feel as if I'm just floating around, passively responding to the operations of nature.
And another person going to the opposite extreme will interpret this experience as saying,
I suddenly realize, I'm God, that I actually govern and control everything that happens.
These are two ways of looking at exactly the same thing. The point being, then, that there is just
one process, which is equally the behavior of the organism and the behavior of the environment.
That you can look at this process from many points of view, define it in many ways,
but you can't really split it up. And so the consequence of this, although I'm not going
to visit the moment in any full way, is to learn to act and behave in terms of this vision of the world.
Not as you're acting upon the world, not as it acting upon you, but as the
unfoldment of a process, which, as you understand it, you become more intelligent and act
more intelligently. Intelligence is a function of the degree to which you realize that your behavior
is one with the behavior of the rest of the world. More you realize that the more one would say,
you appear to be better in control, although you're not actually controlling.
The difficulty, the essential difficulty that lies in the way of most people seeing this,
is the fixed notion that the world consists of separate things and separate events.
As Tair the Shardam put it, the only real atom is the universe. The word atom you see in
Greek is Atomas, a non-Tomas cut. The uncut. It's the same idea as in Louser. The uncarved block
has a great symbol of naturalness. What cannot be further divided? And so the Shardam says it
is the universe that is the only real atom, because if you take anything out of the universe and
separate it, you will find it is ravled at all its edges. It is not in other words cleanly divisible.
But this is something which is left out of our ordinary awareness. Because in our ordinary awareness,
we overlook the connections that go between so-called things and so-called events
and make them actually nothing but aspects of one event. It's as if we were looking at everything
through a sort of Venetian blind where intervals are ignored and cut out. Our senses are of course
as we know screening devices. The eye responds to a very narrow spectrum of the various forms of
light vibrations. We do not see x-rays or cosmic rays. And likewise our ear responds only to a
rather narrow spectrum of sound. We keep screening out. And therefore, not only do we screen with
our senses with the organs of sense. We also screen with the thinking systems by which we interpret
what we sense. It's a further act of screening. And so as a result of this, there are gaps.
And these gaps are symbolized by the fact that we ignore space. We think, as we all sit around here in this room, you see,
that the space is between each of us as we sit here is nothing at all. It's not important.
But actually, it's tremendously important. The space is between people and space as a marvelous thing in
itself is as important as, for example, the intervals between tones in music. It is the intervals
and the hearing of the intervals that enables you to hear melody. And so it is the space between
everything, which instead of being something that divides at joins, but we ignore it. And don't see that space
like the diaphragm in the radio. Space is that in which everything happens and without space no happening.
It's fundamental, but ignored. And there are many other things besides
all kinds of mutual influencing, constantly going on. But this is ignored because for one reason,
but two reasons. One, we don't have time to bother with it. We don't think it's important. And we don't
think it's important because we have been trained to regard only certain things as important.
And that's why in the process of meditation, as it's understood by Buddhists and Taoists,
you stop valuing and putting a price on all the various things that you could be aware of.
You stop thinking and you are simply aware and it suddenly strikes you then that everything is
equally important. And you start being amazed at things that you never were amazed at before.
It's really fascinating. You hear the sound of water.
And that's quite as important as anything I've got to say.
Only you don't translate it. See? The wisest thing I heard in Japan when I was last there
from Morimoto Roche, he said the sound of the rain needs no translation.
We were talking about translating Buddhist texts into English. He said you don't need to do that.
The sound of the rain needs no translation. So when you get that perspective and you realize that
the divisions of one thing from another are all conceptual. Cut out the concepts
and see it to fresh. And there are no divisions. There are connections. Doesn't mean that in the
continuum of the physical world that there are no lines that there are no solids and spaces
and all that's kind of thing. It doesn't mean in other words that if you saw the world correctly,
it would all become a homogenized mass. A lot of people think that that is the Nirvana.
That doesn't mean that at all. It stays just exactly as you see it now, but it has a completely
different sense to it in which all the wiggles in this world are not separated, but it's a continuous
wiggle. I'm greatly interested in the philosophy of wiggles. Because this is a wiggly world.
Look at the hills. As you fly as I've just been flying, getting some perspective of nature from
an airplane and its clouds and mountains, all wiggles. But just every now and then one sees these little
squares and rectangular patterns and things. And you know that's human beings. Busy is trying to
straighten things out. They somehow disapprove of wiggles. Because they wiggles are difficult to control
the slippery. And you want to put that thing there and just say, now, now come on.
But you see the trouble with a wiggle. Is how do you count wiggles? How do you count the wiggles
in a cloud? I mean, formally speaking, is one wiggles a smooth curve like that? Does that
constitute a wiggle? Or it was basically a bump on it. Are there's each a subordinate wiggle?
And how many wiggles does the bump have? It had lots when you start looking at it in a magnifying
glass. It goes on forever. So wiggles of the world, unite. You've nothing to lose but your names.
You see, this is great continuous wiggling. For purposes of being controlled and managed,
is broken down into what we call things and events. But these are no other. Then conventional,
that is to say, socially agreed divisions between the various forms of nature. But nature is
really fondless in the sense that it's all one form. Not in the sense that there are nothing that
we could stick the name cloud on. But the naming the cloud that cloud does not separate the cloud
from the sky, actually. Just as when you pick up water in a sieve, you don't succeed in separating
the water into strips like you would if it was cheese. So all our categorizing leaves the world
undivided. In fact, it is simply a way of being able to talk about it in order to agree how we are
going to control it and what we're going to do with it. Now this is a point that is so fundamental that
I do want to be sure that it's clear. To say, you see that there really are no things and no
events. It's the most people shocking and starting. It's an affront to come in sense.
Because we feel, you know, damn it, this is a shoe. And it's a thing, it's there, I see.
And that actually, this isn't a shoe at all. You know, the shoe is a noise and if this is a noise
at all, it's this sort of noise. Use it for half. How has all sorts of possibilities? But it isn't
the shoe. Yeah. So if you see that, the idea of separate things is an abstraction, let's
call it that. Then this most of all applies to you. As an organism, you are not a separate thing.
You are, first of all, you can look at it from two points of view, on one hand, a living organism
is something like a flame. A flame, although it appears on a candle to be constant, is a stream of gas.
And a flame is never the same for two microseconds. It's a constant flowing of energy.
Or take a whirlpool in a stream. It appears to have a constant form, but it's flowing all the time.
So in exactly the same way, all our bodies appear to have constant form, but we are a flowing of energy.
So we keep coming in and out. Also, it isn't only in this way that the constant flow that you cannot
say, I'm a separate event. But it's also because everything that could be called to be recognized
as a wiggle or a unit of any kind in this world. Has its existence only in relation to all the rest
of them? This is the principle that in Buddhist philosophy is called G. G. Mugeh. The mutual
interpenetration of all things and events. This is very important. I'm sure some of you have
recently read in, say, the scientific American, about holograms. A method whereby you can take a small
square out of a photographic negative, and by the use of laser beams, reconstruct the whole negative
out of which it was taken. Because the little part is nurtured and comes to be in a field of forces
in such a way that all the lines of force within the little part imply the lines of force of
the total photograph when it was taken. It can be reconstructed, maybe when it can explain this
more accurately than I can. But this essentially is the hologram. Because you see that every part
anything that can be designated as a part of something implies the whole. Just as the whole
implies the part, thus a clever anthropologist can take a jawbone and can reconstruct from the
jawbone through all his anthropological knowledge, the beast or man to which it originally belonged.
He said, a jawbone like this, you see implies this kind of a skull and so on and so forth.
So every single thing in this world exists only in relation to the whole system to all the other things.
Because the important point to realize here is that existence is relationship. Relationship
is another word for existence. There is no yang without the in. It is the relationship of
Yang and Yang that enables Yang to be possible and Yin to be possible. Solid to be
possible and space to be possible up and down, life and death, being and non-being.
It is a relationship. So that for example, if I have a drum, but there is no skin on the drum.
It doesn't matter how hard I hit it, it will make no sound.
Because the sound is the relationship of the drum skin and the hand.
And you can carry that principle all the way along that, in other words, if I shout in a
completely non-resonating environment, I will make no noise. In other words, if I shout in a vacuum,
there is no sound. Because I have to make waves, you see, and I can't make waves,
if there is no water. So existence is relationship all the way along. And fundamentally,
then, the relationship of all of us together, of all society constitutes every one of us.
We are as individuals, as personalities, what we are in terms of a human community,
and of interlocking complex of communities. And you may remember when you were children,
I remember it very vividly, how my personality changed in relation to each community that I went into.
In other words, I was one boy at home. I was a completely different boy among my peer group in school.
I was another boy altogether when visiting my uncle. And I realized I had all these different
personalities in relation to different communities. And eventually, I put them together in some sort of way.
And integrated. But I feel still, although I've got a more or less together,
I like to come on differently in different sets of people and play the Joker,
which instead of playing a fixed role, and you can say, well, is that always you,
can we rely upon you always to have this sort of behavior, nanorisms of reactions?
They say, no, I'm not going to get fixed up in that. I'm going to play tricks.
But you didn't notice that, to see, when you were a child, because you see, you were being defined
all the time by the groups you were in. And so you are what you are as a person,
that is to say, as playing a role in life, in relation to the groups around it, with which you move.
And that is a little model of the fact that everything is what it is in its place.
Now, for example, it has been a sort of convention of scientific thought,
hitherto, especially in the kind of science of the 19th century, to try to understand anything and
say what it is by a process of analysis. You understand it by asking, what is it made of?
How is it composed? How was it put together? And so you dissect it. You get your microscopes out,
and you try to dissolve it down to the smallest possible component parts.
And that gives the certain explanation of it, you see?
But what is equally important is to look in the other direction.
A thing, what anything is is defined not only in terms of what it is made of, but of when it is
and where it is. It is context in time and space.
Just as the meaning of a word is dependent on the context of the sentence or the paragraph or the book
in which it is found. So likewise, with our rather myopic way of looking things,
looking at things, because analysis, the ability to analyze and to think analytically, comes from
great skill in dividing wiggles. See, you may think that this is a very, very fine wiggle
you see. But I can make wiggles so little that you can't keep track of them, because you're not
the sharp as I am seeing. I am going to make wiggles that we are going to have a little competition,
who can make the smallest wiggles and keep track of them. As that is a test, if you can keep track
of them, and you can prove it to someone else, because if you get down so small, nobody can keep
track of you, then they don't know whether you are a charlatan or not. But if you can keep track of
the wiggles and prove to other people that you kept track of them. See, this is the whole
game of scholarly one-upmanship. If you can keep track of it, it's been with certain kinds of music,
you see, you can do very complicated rhythms, and they'll believe you, if you can do it again.
And there's not enough to do it once, they say, to that again, how is that a fluke?
Show as you see you're in control and you've been able to count out the beats.
So, through the analytical mind, with pays attention to the details, we have got great skill
in doing that. But you do that at the expense of neglecting completely the other side of things,
is in what context does every individual wiggles happen? See, that's just the other side of it.
It's very important to define the wiggles, but you can't define the wiggles unless the wiggles has
an environment. The outside of the wiggles is important as the inside. So, in the same way,
everybody has an outside and everybody has an inside. We identify ourselves with what is inside.
So, that's me. And thereby ignore the fact that what is outside you is just as much your outside
as what is inside you is your inside. And that's always overlooked. And I mean, when I talk about
your outside, I don't mean just the surface of your skin. I mean everything outside just
in, that's your outside. And if that doesn't function in a certain way, the inside doesn't function
either. They go together. That when a snake moves, the snake makes a curl and so one side of it
is convex and the other side is concave. Which side moves first? Why they both move together?
And so in the same way, the inside, the outside world are not different. In the sense that
they're not separate. They're different, yes. One is inside, they are the outside, but they're
not separate. They move together. Only we're unaware of it. In the ordinary way, through a kind
of psychological myopia, of fixing on, of being hung up on certain ways of looking at things.
There's a Buddhist word, clasher in Sanskrit, Bonneau in Japanese, that we normally translate
attachment or defiling passion. The exact translation of clasher in modern America is hang up.
It's a perfect word for it. Have a hang up. And so to be hung up on a fixed way of looking at things,
that the world is only divided in this way and that way in the other way,
is to fail to see what I've been describing then as the going togetherness, the inseparability
of all insides, from all outsides and vice versa, and of all organisms from their environments
and vice versa. You can get this very clearly when you realize that if you get hung up
on the viewpoint of separateness, then even your body is not a unity. You are just
a mass of cells. And if then you take in physics, you're not even cells, you're molecules.
Not even molecules, just atoms. Not even atoms, just subatomic particles,
wave-accles or whatever. And you disintegrate everything into that and you realize that there are vast
spaces between all these tiny little wigglets, whatever they are, wave-accles. Huge spaces.
Meaning if a molecule in your body was magnified to the size of a tennis ball,
the nearest one would be quite a way away. What ties all this together? How can you look at
that as a unity? What's tied together by space? Fields, with force, gravitation.
And so in exactly the same way, look at us behaving around here from a larger level of magnification.
You can very easily see that we are just as tied together as the molecules in our hands.
And that generation after generation, we come and go, you look at the leaves coming on the trees
in the spring. And you can describe this in so many different ways.
You can say these are new leaves. Last year's leaves fell off and the fallen into the ground.
And now a new generation of leaves come, which are quite different. And if the leaf had an eagle,
you see, let's say, wow, I've come into being. I'm new.
But from another point of view, you could just say, the tree is leafing again.
This is something the tree does like every so often.
And man gets up the morning. He's shaving. He stops doing that. Next morning, he's shaving again.
Now, is the shaving as something that has an eagle when every day's shave is a different shave.
It is from one point of view. It is different, but it's also shaving. It's the same.
It's because we are so fascinated with the individual details of people that generation after generation,
we say they're quite different. That somebody who really was from Mars and didn't understand people,
would say they keep on coming. They're just the same ones coming back.
So, every year's leaves are the same old leaves coming back. See, they die and they are reabsorbed and they keep coming back.
If they think keeps doing it again, but there are these spaces, and actually,
it's like the troughs between the crests of a wave. And we say, whether of those spaces,
we don't see anything, so we say, well, that's finished. So, when you die, you think, well, that's finished.
Too bad. But you see, what you are really is the energy field, and it keeps doing you. It keeps
peopleing. And it's you who keep peopleing. Who else is responsible?
Only, of course, we mustn't admit that. We're responsible for this. So, the whole game is to pretend you aren't.
See, it's happening, and it's not medicine, and it's landed with me. I'm not sure what it is.
In this morning's session, I was emphasizing primarily the theoretical aspects.
Of ecological awareness, showing how our differentiation between separate things and events
is an abstraction, and that the whole world is an inseparable unity, not of separate parts.
But of the kind of system in which everything that might be called a part, when we talk about it,
everything that might be called a part is, in fact, an expression or function of the whole thing.
And that if we came to our senses, we would be aware of ourselves, not as
only on the inside of our skins. But we would be aware that the outside is us too.
That there is a relationship between the organism and the environment, the subject and the object,
and the individual and the world, such that the two presuppose each other.
And I did get around to the point of mentioning towards the end.
The reason how and why this can become apparent, if our minds are not constantly obsessed with the
image. If in other words, we can come to contemplating, seeing, feeling the actual world
without putting names and labels on it. In other words, to see it directly,
rather than thinking about it, for, as I said, these separations are conceptual.
Now, I want to take this into a more practical dimension this afternoon.
And that is to say, that hand in hand with this whole question of
overcoming the hallucination of separateness. There goes also
a formation of a new style of relationship to the material present.
It's very important, you see, first of all, to realize that all reality is present.
That the present moment is where you have always lived and where you will always live.
There is no other time than now. Time passed and time future are also abstractions.
But in our culture in particular, we have a very bad relationship to the material present.
And not only to the present, but also to that aspect of the same thing, which is material.
And this comes out so strongly in the way in which we educate our children.
We do not, in our schools, really have anything very much, which relates people to the material
present. And thus our achievements, in regard to the handling of the material present, are extremely
shuddy. School prepares people for a kind of Brahmin's existence. That is to say, for literary,
verbal operations. It educates us to be bureaucrats, insurance salesmen, bankers, clerks,
accountants, and lawyers, maybe doctors, and so on. And a person who is going on say in high school
and is thought not fit for college is encouraged to take reluctantly offered courses
in trades and manual skills. And in England where the state of affairs is much worse than it is here,
even. There was make jokes about American universities where you can get a B.A. degree in
basket weaving. Because that's infra dig. That is loss of face in an academic community that
there should be basket weaving courses. Bad enough to have a degree in physical education.
But the point of the matter is that we are so obsessed with the life of abstractions,
with problems of status, with problems of the world as symbolized, rather than the world to be
symbolized. That most of us don't relate to physical existence at all.
Now I remember and I mentioned this in one of those leaflets I sent out, but I remember very well
in 1936 in London at the World Congress of Faiths when Suzuki Dicets was present.
He's the one who's written all the essays on Zen Buddhism, the great scholar.
And he had made a very very significant contribution to the Congress, various lectures and discussions
he had held. And at the final meeting of the Congress, they took over the Queen's Hall,
great big auditorium. And they set as the subject matter for the evening the Supreme
spiritual ideal, upon which representatives of all the great religious traditions got up and delivered
themselves of volumes of hot air. Finally, Suzuki was the last speaker and he got up and he said
approximately. I am feeling very confused tonight. I am a simple countryman from a faraway
place, and I find myself in this assembly of so-ranid people. I am asked to talk about Supreme
spiritual ideal. Seems to me I do not know what Supreme spiritual ideal is, so I rock up spiritual
indicionary and I cannot understand. He said you have around here very big city and I walk
around street and very prosperous, but it is not right. You have spiritual over here,
you have material well over here, and both are unreal. And then he went on to give a description
of his house and garden in Japan and at the end of it he had a standing ovation. For somehow he was
real, he came across as somebody was lovable, intelligible and human, as distinct from a mere preacher.
And he made this intensely important point. That if you understand the spiritual
correctly, it is not different from the material. The material is the spiritual. But in order to
see why that is so, one first has to make a clear difference between the material and the abstract
and to understand that the abstract doesn't mean the same thing as the spiritual. The abstract
world is a world of symbols, a world of words, a world of concepts, which has the same relation
to the physical universe as the menu to the dinner or as money to wealth. I mean money in the
sense of bookkeeping entries in a bank or dollar bills. One must be very careful, therefore not
to confuse the spiritual and the abstract. If by the spiritual we designate the domain of
ultimate reality, the unified or more strictly non-dual energy of the universe that I was talking
about this morning, that has nothing whatsoever really to do with abstractions. What we call
physical reality, the material world is much closer to what would be meant by spiritual than
anything abstract is. But the thing is that when we form in our minds, the average person who talks
about the physical world, he has a concept of the physical world, which is what really should
be referred to as materiality when one uses that word in a putdown way. If for example, we talk about
I could even say this to phyologians and they would eventually understand me. If we talk about the
evils of the flesh, the word the flesh doesn't mean the body. In the sense of this,
the flesh as something evil represents a conception of the body as something to be exploited
in order to satisfy one's spiritual emptiness.
And thus too, when we speak of materialism, we aren't really talking about materialism. We're
talking about an abstract conception of the value of the material world. Real materialism would
of course be the love of material, which is something quite different from materialism as one sees
it in practice. So it's very important to realize that when we say the physical world and we talk
about matter as something which is antithetical to the spiritual, are you are not talking about
this? Because all this doesn't have those kind of qualities that we would call materiality
as against the spiritual. If you really get in touch with your senses, with the so-called physical world,
you're in for many surprises. First of all, if you go back to the point I made,
that there really is only the present. You will see that what we call this physical world
is not something expanded in time stretched out over time.
It is not material also in the sense of being composed of stuff. We see one of our problems in the
West as we think about the relationship of the spiritual to the physical by analogy with form and
matter, or rather with clay as matter and the form as the part made out of the clay.
And therefore we've never been able to put the two together because our conception of matter
as something essentially like clay, a sort of primordial stuff. This has no intelligence,
nor does it possess energy. And therefore when you think of the world as
sort of co-operation or a mixture of form and matter, you have therefore to invoke an external
agency, to inform matter and to bring it into shape, to order it and to produce art.
But this dualism of form and matter is really rather meaningless.
Nobody ever saw an immaterial form or a formless material. There really is no such thing as stuff
out of which the universe is made. Stuff is actually a word for looking at the world with bad
focus. When you are focused on something is not clear, it is fuzzy. And this fuzziness or
indistinctness is stuff. When you are focused on the world is clear, you see pattern,
you see details, you see structure. Now as you look more deeply into any structure, it starts
to get fuzzy again. And therefore you ask of what stuff is this structure made. Stuff meaning
fuzz. But then again when you turn up the level of magnification and it once becomes again
becomes bright and clear, you see within the great structures and the great patterns smaller ones.
So you always encounter the world as patterning, never as stuff. And so our physical world that surrounds us
is not, is in a way immaterial. It is a fantastic pulsation of vibrations,
which give an illusion of solidity. In just the same way that if I take a lighted cigarette in the
dark and rapidly revolve it, you get the illusion of a continuous circle of fire. So the apparent
motion of the present moment from the past of the future gives an illusion of continuity.
As if there was something extended in time. And in exactly the same way, the table, because it
is vibrating outside with such tremendous energy, gives an illusion of solidity. In exactly the same
way as the blades of a propeller or an electric fan on their own rotation. And in the same way as you
will come to trouble, you try to put your fingers through the fan. The only reason you can't
get your finger through the table, it's going even faster than a fan. And it bounces your finger
off when you feel hardness. Your finger is being bounced off because of this tremendous
energy that lies in and as the table. Likewise, it's also in your finger. So what is actually
what we are actually confronted with? What is here and now? Now, ever is certainly not a material
world as we ordinarily conceive it? But is something intensely magical and strange?
And the more the spinosa once said, the more you know of particular things, the more you know of God.
And then put it in another way. If you want to find out, what is the spiritual? What is
Buddha nature? What is Brahman? What is dull? The best way is to go directly to the physical
world and find out. The physical world as you are it and as everything around you is it,
the immediate experience. Now to go back, this as I said is something which our culture
which WASP culture in particular neglects because we are obsessed with abstract attainments.
And this goes back to some curious factors in our history. To introduce this matter, I have to
refresh your minds about caste, strangely enough. In ancient Hindu society, there are four
casts, respectively Brahmins, who are priests, theologians, philosophers and intellectuals.
Kshatriya, who are warriors and rulers, politicians. Vaisya, who are merchants and
shudra, who are laborers, blue colour workers. These casts have something peculiar about them in
the fact that they are eternal. Let me say perennial. They still exist, even though we don't admit it.
There are kshatriya people around and they are very different from Brahmins.
The typical fraternity American with his crew cut and his
use his alcohol is aggressive, likes football and so on. He is a kshatriya type. The
professorial quiet fellow is a Brahmin. The business man is a Vaisya and our blue colour people are
shudraks. They are still there and they are all necessary to each other. They balance each other
in a very fascinating way. The Brahmin cannot get on by himself. He needs the kshatriya, the Vaisya,
and the shudra. Likewise, every one of them needs the others. But there was a curious revolution
in Europe at the time we call the Reformation. When the Vaisya got the upper hand of the Brahmins
and the kshatriyas, the feudal aristocracy began to lose power in the face of, say, the great
merchant bankers of Italy and the burgers of Central Europe. The Brahmins, who were the priests
of the Roman Catholic Church, began to lose power because their doctrine was criticized and fell
under suspicion. For you must see that the Protestant religion was the creation of the burger
cities of Europe, of places like Geneva, Frankfurt and one must add London, Edinburgh. Immediately,
money values began to dominate Christian theology. For example, the number of holy days was very
strictly cut down by all Protestant sects because those were holidays and the merchants didn't want
their apprentices taking all these holidays off and not busying themselves. And so always connected
with the Protestant ethic of the virtues of frugality, saving money, saving up for the future,
and in such things, our Vaisya ideals are running a bit wild. And thus you see our ethic,
since the common sense ethic, that is to say the basic conception of the good life as it is held
in the United States, is very largely a creation of bourgeois Protestantism. We have a very bad
relation to the material present. Because that's one thing that the Vaisya can't maintain by
himself, any more than the Brahmin or the Chateau, the Shudra could maintain it by himself.
We have a whole world based on this two things. Save up. There's a good time coming.
So, put your money aside, invest it. Secondly, which is somewhat contradictory, happiness consists
in the possession of things. A lot of people, when they feel inadequate, bored, unfulfilled,
try to get rid of this sensation by going shopping. A lot of people spend all their day time
shopping. That's the thing to do. You go out and shop. The women galore who go into San Francisco
every day just to shop and come back loaded with all kinds of things. But these things are not true
material possessions. At least two reasons. Number one, most of them aren't well made.
Number two, you can't use that many things. You can store them, you can put them away,
you can show your friends that you've got this in that. But you can't live in six houses at once.
You can't ride more than two horses at a time. Unless you're doing some sort of a circus act.
You can't drive more than one car at a time. So, we tend to become absolutely overloaded
with possessions and have the greatest difficulty therefore in moving ourselves around.
Because every time we move, we have to carry all the stuff with us. Let's take the comparison
between a Japanese living room and a British American or German living room. You see the
Japanese living room, you have a table and some cushions and the floor. And you don't have any beds,
you sleep in a futon and a quilt and that's delightful. You don't therefore have to
hall beds around. You don't have over-stuff chairs which stand in most rooms like gun
emplacements. You know these huge things, vast things that have to be pushed around very heavy.
We, in other words, are absolutely cluttered with enormously heavy objects.
And it doesn't return to our true material comfort.
Because we are always using our muscles to to lug them around. They have to be taken care of.
They have to be cleaned. The moths have to be kept out of them. They're a perfect pest.
So, we don't really understand furniture. Now, I would think furniture and a house and a shelter
is one of the most important things in life. Shelter is fundamental.
But when you see what shelter, most people in the United States have provided for themselves,
you're a guest, clapboard boxes, miles and miles and miles of them.
That you wouldn't want a dog to live in. Have you ever looked at the furniture and
backwards home? They're absolutely uninspired junk. It has nothing whatsoever to recommend it.
It isn't good design. It isn't fun. It's just nowhere. What's something else is material
importance that really, after all, we ought to know something about clothes.
Well, by and large, we are shocking, they're clothes. As compared with many other people,
men go around looking like funeral directors in the most uncomfortable
survivors of military uniforms. Women wear frocks and dresses and things that
cover up amazing systems of pulleys and blocks and tackles.
I don't know if it's a lazy and they have no real joyous colour occasionally. I mean,
we all know exceptions. But I'm talking about the generality of the culture. The clothes don't
look as if anybody really enjoyed wearing them. They're a warm because one has to be dressed
and covered up and decent, and therefore they're worn rather apologetically.
To get furthermore, they wear out in nothing flat. And to buy good clothes, you have to go outside
the country. Of course, if you want to dress in a rather traditional way, you're going to get
British tweeds from the hebrides. But if you want to dress colourfully and beautifully, you have to
go to Mexico and get gorgeous materials or to India and get silk for saris or to Java and get
batiks for sarangs. And these things will last forever. They are beautifully made by people
who had a real enthusiasm about making them because in the life of the people who make such
things, they don't make a differentiation between working and playing. But in a culture where you
work and play is different. You work in order to make money to play. This is insane because you spend
most of the time working. And then what you carry, if you don't really value the work, I mean,
you're lucky if you've got works that you really enjoy doing. But if you don't really value
the work, all you get out of it is money. Then you come home with that and you're supposed to play.
Well, you're pretty tired to begin with. And we just don't play. That's all there is to it.
You might play Saturday or something when there's a day off. But in the evening, very few people
actually play. They sit and passively watch television. And they've got all the money in the world.
I mean, compared with Hindus and Africans and so on, we live like princes. But we don't enjoy it.
Not really. There's no gusto for it. You would think that people would come home and have
orgies and banquets with all that money. And they don't. It's just a sort of constant disappointment.
Well, going back to clothes. I can illustrate another way in which our clothes are made without
regard for material values. And most clothes are made of cloth. And when you weave cloth,
cloth has a certain nature. It comes out in a long, wide strip, which is rectangular.
We take this material woven this way and we try to fit it to the contours of the body
by shaping. By doing things with rectangular material that rectangular material just doesn't want to do.
To fit the sleeves of a man's jacket, it doesn't want to do that. And therefore, our jackets
don't fold up properly. Whenever you take them out of a suitcase, they have to go to the dry cleaners
to be pressed or your wife has to iron it. Our shirts are man's shirt. It's the most ridiculous
construction. It will not fold unless you're an expert, long dress. There's nothing you can do about it.
And it always comes out of a suitcase ruffled. And it requires all kinds of care to get the thing
ready to be wearable. And it's white and gets filth in nothing flat. There's no rationale to it,
whatsoever, not at the neck tie, which isn't has to be worn with a sort of noose to strangly with.
But if I may point out that Japanese kimono is quite different, it follows the nature of cloth.
The rectangular forms of the cloth, if you stretch it out like that, it hangs in a rectangle right here
from your sleeve and it falls over you. It hasn't been forced to fit you. And therefore, it fits you comfortably.
The cloth conforms itself to you by its nature. And therefore, gives you a certain dignity.
I once saw a Tibetan woolen garment. It was a cloak. And it was prepared by their method,
which is they have a method of pounding wool rather than weaving it. And they make it into a great
big, again, it's a rectangle. And it's a double rectangle, the front one and the back one.
The front one is split down the center. And at the sides there's a place for the sleeves to go through
and beyond that it's stitched. So you just got this sort of, if you put it out like that,
looks like a sort of sandwich board. Well, we had this one evening and we got every man in the room to
put it on. And they were about five men. And it turned all of them into kings. They looked absolutely
wriggle in this thing. He was so dignified and so exquisitely beautiful. I have a Japanese friend
who told me he always wore Western clothes in Japan. And I asked him why I said,
well, you're absurd. I said, you have the most comfortable clothes anybody ever invented.
First you go around and Western business soup for. Always said, I wouldn't be seeing dead in Kyoto in
a kimono. You can't run for a bus in a kimono. True. But what a degradation. You see the
human being. You've got to be someone who got to run for a bus now, you see. Whereas if you put
on a kimono, you're very comfortable, but you have to be leisurely. You have to stroll
rather than rush. And that slows you down. Because you see all people who are in a rush
are not related to the material present. Fusing that's take you're in a rush to get coffee when
you go to get up in the morning. What do you do? You take instant coffee. And that's a punishment
for being in a hurry. It doesn't taste of coffee, not really. So because you you fostered it,
it's like forcing the growth of tomatoes. They don't taste of tomatoes anymore.
Forced apples, they're called delicious. They're nothing but wet-pith.
So this is very important. This is showing that we aren't here. We're insane. We're not all there
as they say. But trying to get to something. The result, the thing we thought we wanted,
the thing that we thought would be what would make us happy. You've got to get something.
Now, it's true. In order to not be hungry, you have to eat. And therefore, when you eat,
there's a certain satisfaction. You feel all right. But then, when you begin to consider that
life is going to wear out and there are also problems, disease, change, and misfortune, and you
get depressed. And then, in order to feel happy, you eat when you don't need to eat.
Then you begin to get obesity and indigestion. And wonder why the possession of all this great
food isn't doing anything for you. It's supposed to. And so in the same way with the property of
all kinds, when it is used to get the thing that you look forward to in the future. And don't
seem to have now. It becomes a complete delusion. And you can't understand because you think that the
possession of these things ought to make you happy. The admen have persuaded you that if you could
get this kind of car, this kind of yacht, this kind of house, this kind of scene, whatever it may be,
you should, that's the thing in life. That's what's important. And it doesn't make people happy at all.
And then they wonder why it doesn't and feel cheated. And they have to go to psychoanalysis.
And churches and things like that, to be persuaded, that it's coming sometime.
Somehow, the thing that is always seems to be missing. And there's nothing missing at all.
I accept, I mean, supposing you're absolutely starved. And you just don't have the normal flow
of energy through your organism. Then of course, you need food.
Or if you're freezing, you need shelter. But in the ordinary way, when you are fed and sheltered,
there isn't anything missing. It's all here. But nobody is here to see it. Everybody is wondering
after something else in the distance. And of course, this is preeminently true with two other
aspects of life, I've discussed housing, furniture and clothing. But more specifically,
the food in the white Anglo-Saxon Protestant culture is unbelievably bad.
When you consider it by and large, the reason being, is that we eat food because it's good for us.
And that's a dreadful thing to do. Because it means that you look at the food from the point of view
of abstract diatetics rather than concrete taste. And wherever diaticians get interfering with cooking,
it's utterly destroyed. In every university, in every university, from coast to coast,
where you would think would be centers of culture. The institutional food is unbelievably
abominable. And the scholars are ashamed to come out about it, because and protest and lay down
the law, because they're supposed to be devoted to higher things. And after all, what you eat,
just as long as it's got the right chemicals, and it isn't very important.
But what this is, you see, the trouble with that is, two things, to eat in order to live,
sort of that it's good for you, is, what do you mean good for you? It means that it helps you
to go on into the future. But what is the point of going on into the future? When all the meals
ahead of you are these unappetizing things, they're just going to enable you to go on into the future.
And the second thing is that eating in this spirit is very disrespectful to all the creatures
you have killed in order to eat. It's even disrespectful to an onion to eat it in properly.
Anions are living creatures. And if you cut up an onion for dinner, you should reverence the
onion. You should respect it, because if you don't have a feeling of love for the onion,
for the fish, for whatever you eat, you won't cook it properly, and you won't enjoy it.
Cooking is a process of loving, and that is a pain of respect to these marvelous beings,
which we ingest in order to go on living. So this entirely futuristic,
diatetic attitude to food is, again, you see, a question of purely quantitative thinking
of lack of relation to the material world. One other rather important aspect of life is love-making.
Here again is a subject entirely neglected in our education. From any practical point of view,
I mean a lot of theoretical works, some of which are fantastic and grotesque, but as a fine art,
when you compare what goes on in most bedrooms with the things that are suggested in the
commerce, the difference is amazing. There could be a real great art as between lovers,
husbands, and wives, and so on. It's something again that we don't consider, because once again,
although sex is fun, we go about it, not really because we enjoy, we can't admit that,
but it's good for us, it's a healthy outlet, and also it's necessary, of course, for having children,
and that's also something for the future. And likewise, where it gets to children,
we don't relate to children in the material present very well. This is especially true of what
one calls child-centered families. Here is a frustrated Mama and Papa who feel guilty for some
reason or other, either they didn't really make it in life the way they wanted to make it,
and they hope their children will, and they feel that anyway, the reason why I am earning a living,
and you are a housewife, is that it's for the sake of our children. We live as husband and wife
in order to bring up children. Now this is completely backwards. If a husband and wife have a
vocation in life, that is to say, they are deeply interested in and devoted to living,
supposing the husband is a doctor, and he is fascinated with healing people, and that's
really what he's about. The children, if permitted to do so, will catch his fascination.
If the wife loves working in the kitchen, the children actually want to help.
But we don't allow them to, because what we do is, in an industrial society, you can't possibly
have children around the factory or the office. In more primitive agricultural societies, you can
have children around the farm, around the shop, and so on, and it is in the countries like Mexico,
and it used to be so in Japan before they shrill them all after school. The children work
along with their parents and learn their crafts. But now, we, first of all, say, no, no,
we're going to do something, we're going to propitiate you with toys, and these are fake,
plastic replicas of things that adults play with, like guns, and dolls. And they're always,
they're always frustrating. They never quite come up to expectations. The children, therefore,
break them, and it reduces them to fury, and at the end of the day, every household I know,
and a good, nice American homes, whether a children, they are strewn from end to end,
with this integrated plastic. Papa is coming home from the office with a mysterious
permutative called money, which is, you've got to bring it, but nobody's really interested.
So, the house has to be tired of him to get back. Therefore, there's a screaming knock-down
drag-out battle, with Mama trying to get all the children to clean up and throw this stuff away.
And he comes home from a job in which nobody is interested, because they have no part in it.
The wife knows nothing about it, except in a theoretical way. The children know nothing about it,
because it's something he does off there. And then, all his interest, if he has any interest in his
job at all, off there with the community of people with whom he works in that situation,
he comes back, and with people to whom he now has absolutely no real relationship,
whatever. He's supposed to be a good pal, a nice kind husband. And that is why in all our
comic magazines, the father of the family is portrayed as a clown, invariably. All the jokes are
poor old dad. But again, you see, this is abstractionism.
It's a result, for example, that the whole family set up in our culture is an institution,
hanging over from a grounds civilization, which just doesn't work in an urban and industrial
civilization. And we keep it up because that's the way things are supposed to be. And we've
never rethought human relationships in immediate relation to this new kind of situation in which
we're living. So, those families that thrive and get on reasonably well with each other,
our fortunate flukes, which is the rule always be a certain number.
I could go on endlessly with this discussion of our lack of relation. I mean, let's just take
our notions of feminine beauty. They're entirely fabricated by some curious creeps
who edit Vogue magazine and half as bizarre to make stuffed dummies who, um,
when actually encountered are about as comfortable as falling into the middle of a bicycle.
And you know, poor women, they're always having to live up to the image of some movie star or
somebody who is the great type of the day, the feel their husbands will be disappointed if they
don't look like that. And that's because we set up these ideal external surface forms of beings,
having no sensitivity to the substance, to the weight, to the volume, to the temperature
and above all to the smell. It is indeed the sense of smell among all matters of the material
present is the most repressed in this culture. And therefore, interestingly enough,
it is one of the main channels of unconscious communication. Whatever is repressed
is, as it, young would say, put into the unconscious and thereby activated in a special way.
So a great deal of ESP or telepathic communication intuitive likes and dislikes, we form for other
people are the result of the sense of smell, which we don't recognize consciously as we are not
attending to it. And the word smell means bad smell. It smells. You know the story about Dr Johnson,
who never bathed, you know. And he was traveling in a coach and a very dignified lady got in
sat down and said to him, you smell. He said, madden on the contrary, you smell. I stink.
But you see smell is essentially bad smell. In English, there are only three adjectives,
peculiarly used for qualities of smell, fragrant, accurate pungent. All other adjectives used
for smell are borrowed from taste or some other sense. It's a repressed, you see. We're not really
aware of smell. And so we want the human body to smell of disinfectants and things like that rather
than a natural, interesting flavors. And so everybody is scrubbed and overcleaned and squirted
with alcohol or something so that they shant smell. But actually they do smell. Only they smell
of kind of a lab instead of people. So you can see in these many, many ways that we are not here
and we are not present to materiality. Because of the strange notion you see that the material
present is a hoax. You say, lay in that up to yourselves treasure up on earth where
mouth and rust corrupt. But lay up to yourselves treasure in heaven. Well the way we've interpreted
that saying is, lay up treasure in the future. Take out your life, eternal life insurance policy,
it's coming. Actually treasure in heaven is now. But we think that the real now world you see
is disintegrating, crumbling. And therefore is bad. But that's not the reason. The fact that
the yes, the real world now is always unseasable. It's changing. You can't grasp it. There's nothing
to hold on to. But that's why it's spiritual. When you lean on it, it collapses. But don't lean on it.
Live in it, but don't lean on it. Don't try to hold it. Because in just the same way as when
you embrace someone and you try to hold too hard, you squeeze the breath out of them.
And therefore you're strangled. So in the same way you don't grab hold of the world. You can't
sense it that way. I cannot feel whatever this is. But I'm not doing this. I can't get the maximum
taste out of beef by grinding it to pieces with my teeth and forcing my tongue against it.
Because what I do is I dull the nerve ends. It's a kind of a light touch. You let it flow through
your fingers. And so by letting life slip and it's always slipping. And it's now ever changing.
It's the more it runs, the more it stays, the more it runs. That's the way it is. And if you don't hold
on to it, it's always here. If you do hold on to it, it is always running away.
So you suddenly discover that this is the most shocking thing. You see that the physical
world right here and now this absolutely concrete moment is everything that you could ever
have imagined the beatific vision to be. This is quite startling but it's so. If you are
really wide awake. I have thought of a sort of fantasy and I'll try and describe it.
When you read about the beatific vision in the Paradiso of Dante, you get this fantastic
description of the sort of rainbow rose at the center vivid white light which you can't look at.
Just dazzling white light. And then as it goes out from that you get all the colors of the
spectrum going out and devalued and then going out into black. But it's black so transparent like
obsidian that it's luminous black. And then again suddenly vivid white and a great arc comes
around the black and it does the trick again. And now that's not all it can do. The rays start waving.
See the whole thing starts shimmering like waves. And then it says now that's not all we can
do then they do color cues. Every conceivable kind of complexity. And then they start making angles
all the lights that's dancing. You can imagine those Buddhist mandalas where there are
radiances full of mirriots of buddhas all dancing all rattling bells and thunderboats and
swords and the whole thing is going to attract. Then suddenly it goes into another dimension. See
there's more of it. And then it starts getting sound dimensions going with it all this color.
And smell dimensions going with the sound. And the sound gets so deep and base and so vibrant
that it becomes solid and you can touch it. And the thing gets more and more complicated and
suddenly before you know where you are. Here it is. We adjust that thing. Reach this degree of complexity.
See just like that. But it's never, it's never somewhere else to see. You don't get it anywhere
but here. Now if you, you try to find it here and say now gully he said it's right now.
I've got a really got a pair of tension to now. See. And you try to look at that, you see. And
bring now into focus and really look at it. You're still pushing it away. It has to come to you.
By you, you can't seek now because the moment you seek it, you're not looking at the real now.
You're looking at one just ahead. See. So, in some, this
necessity of relating to the material present is one of the cardinal components of a good ecological
attitude. Because greed, which is essentially discontent with the present, admittedly some
people living on the edge of poverty have an inadequate material present from a physical point of view.
But it is the greed of the well taken care of that is a terrifying. People who have enough to eat and
wear and cloth and are still greedy and therefore go out to exploit this earth and drag every last
ounce of wealth out of it, which is immediately turned into rubbish and poison gas.
Because they can't be alive here at the moment. So, let's take an admission.
In yesterday's session two sessions, I covered first the ecological conception
of an organism's relationship to its environment and thus, of course, the individual's relationship to the
universe. And I was trying to show you that this is not a question of two systems that are separate
acting upon each other or interacting. It is a question rather of a single system of energy
expressed with great complexity, which is one process, one activity.
It is possible to become aware that this is so not simply theoretically, but as a matter of
sensation, and when one becomes aware of it in that way, the feeling is at first curious and
is apt to be misinterpreted. It can be felt either as if you were sort of floating, that is
completely passive, not doing anything, not making any exertion of will, but as if all your behavior
was simply happening. That is one way of feeling it, another way of feeling it,
is the sensation that you are God and making everything happen. These are the polar opposite ways
of feeling the same thing. And when people for one reason or another, slip into this kind of
sensation and it can happen by accident, they may jump to very strange conclusions,
depending on their background, their religious upbringing, because it is that background which gives
them a language in which to express to others and to themselves how they feel.
But you must be very clear about this and understand it theoretically thoroughly, just in case
this ever happens to you so that you won't be accused of being crazy. It is not, you see, that
your own individual organism is the puppet of everything else, responding to it,
as a billiard ball responds to being hit by a cue. It is not also that you as an individual are
an independent source of energy which pushes the world around. Both these views are based on
a false assumption, that the individual organism is really separate from the world, that's the
false assumption. And we think about this situation by analogy with billiards,
because Newton thought that way, they can't thought that way, and Newton and Decap have
molded the common sense of the average person living in the 20th century, even though our science
has abandoned the mechanics of Newton. It certainly has in physics, it certainly has in biology,
although I find that in psychology, people still talk and think in a Newtonian way,
that, for example, Freud, structured the organism of psychology of the human psyche,
by analogy with hydraulics. So you must call Freudianism a form of psycho hydraulics.
The unconscious is the deeps. Sexual energy is represented like the flow of a river,
which can be damned up, repressed. It has to be provided with outlets. These are all hydraulic terms
and hydraulics as a form of Newton's mechanics, because you see in Newtonian mechanics, which
based really on billiards. The balls are standing for atoms, and they bang each other around,
and so everything is explained. The movement of ball A is explained by the behavior of balls
B, C, D, and E, and so on. Insofar as they impinge against it, and you have to go back and back
and back trying to figure out how it all got started. Who pushed it first? And who pushed him?
You see? Well, this model won't do anymore. The things just don't behave that way, because they
are not separate from each other in the first place. This is the point I wanted to make clear
in this first round of discussion that we had yesterday. That the differentiation of the world
is not separation. Any more than when you see many waves on the ocean, they are different
waves, but it's all the one ocean waving. And you can't have half a wave, for example, a wave
that is crest without trough. That's half waves that are just not found in nature.
And so in the same way, you can't find solids except in space, and you won't find space except
whether or not solids. Because they are aspects of each other in rather the same way as in
magnetism, the positive and negative or north and south poles are always found together.
You can't have a purely north pole magnet. And in order to have a current and electric current
flowing, it must be polarized. It will not flow until both poles are attached.
So in the same way, there is a polar relationship between the individual and the world.
They are both aspects of a single energy. And so there is no question of things being controlled
and moved and pushed by other things as billid balls are or billid balls appear to be from a
certain superficial point of view. We've just got this huge being, although being is not
quite the right word, because existence is composed of being and non-being, corresponding to
solid and space, crest and trough of wave. And because fundamentally the energy of the world is
vibritory. It's arm and off. And there is no off without arm, no arm without off.
To be or not to be is not the question. Because to be implies not to be as much as not to be
implies to be. So in the Taoist Chinese philosophy, it is said that being and non-being
arise mutually. It's like the egg in the hand. You don't find eggs without hands,
nor do you find hands without eggs. A hand is as a matter of fact, one egg is where it's
becoming other eggs. It all goes together. But we don't see this for the simple reason.
That we are primarily involved in using a method of perception, which is analytic.
Which spotlights various features of the world. And does so with the aid of naming
or giving symbols to those features of the world, which we consider significant.
And therefore ignoring features of the world, which we don't consider in significant.
And for which therefore we don't have names. Haven't you noticed how often children
point that something and say what is that? And you can't make up exactly what it is they're pointing
at. They are pointing out something they've noticed, but which adults don't consider important.
And they want a name for it. We don't have a special word for dry space.
We don't have a special word for the inside surface of a tube. But in American Indian languages
have such words. Eskimos recognise five different kinds of snow.
But the Aztec language has one word for snow, rain, hail, and ice.
You can see the geographical reasons for that. So according to what you consider important,
you have names. And according to naming, you identify separated separate things.
But they're only separate in a purely theoretical way. They're not material, they're separate.
Not physically separate. And so it's immensely important that we become aware of this fact.
Because if we're not aware of it, we do the most stupid things.
We try to solve problems by altering what are only the symptoms of problems.
We try, for example, unilaterally to abolish mosquitoes.
For getting that mosquitoes go with a certain kind of environment and play a very important
part in it. Not to mention other insects, which are killed when we kill the mosquitoes.
And so in this way, we are doing things without recognizing that they're going to have unpredictable
results in unexpected places. Same way, if you put certain drugs or certain operations in the human
organism, you've got to be very careful about what you're doing. And you have to study the
organism very carefully in order to know what consequences this will have.
If you farm in a certain way, without due respect for the ecology of the whole area in which you're
working, you can get the most appalling results. And characteristically, our technological civilization
is much too heedless of these ecological connections.
Therefore, in order to overcome our characteristic sense of hostility to the external world
and to stop conquering nature with the bulldozers or conquering space with rockets,
we have to realize that the external universe is just as much our self as our own body.
That we have each one of us an inside and an outside. And if the inside of your skin is your
inside, what is outside your skin is your outside. And the two are inseparable, they are polar.
Because you can't have an inside without an outside or an outside, except you construct something like
a Klein bottle, which is a sort of freak. Maybe the universe has such as a Klein bottle,
who knows. However, the second point I was making, which arises directly from this,
and this was the burden of the second session, was that this ignorance or ignorance of
the inseparableity of all different things goes hand in hand with a bad relationship or an
inadequate relationship to the material present. I was showing that the material present
is the only time there is. Other times, pastimes, future times, are abstractions.
The never is anything but the present. But you mustn't, of course, think of the present
as a split second. That's an abstract view of the present. You tend to think of the present as a
split second because you're used to looking at a watch. And the watch is marked out with hairlines
and the idea of watchmakers is to make those lines as thin as possible,
consistent with visibility. And therefore, as they hand sweeps across the hairline,
you've hardly time to say now, and we begin to think that the present is that. Well, of course,
it isn't. Present time is rather like the field of vision, where you've got, as it were,
a fairly clear center, the field of vision is an oval, and you can run your fingers around it,
just at the point where they start to become invisible. And you realize that the edge of the field is fuzzy.
And so in the same way, we have a vision of movement in time as having fuzzy edges.
Just as when you're listening to music, you don't hear music a single note at a time. You hear it
in phrases. You anticipate what's coming, and you remember what has been played. And so you have a
kind of wide but fuzzy edge view of what is called the present. But what there's always there,
see? And if in a culture, we are brought up not to see this. We start living for the future.
And we live for the future, mainly because our present is inadequate.
And it's inadequate, because we are not seeing it fully. We are seeing it in terms of abstractions.
And if your present is inadequate, and is the matter of fact only an abstract version of life,
you are like a person with a non-nutritive diet. You always therefore feel hungry,
and you keep eating because you want more. So in the same way, more life please, more time please,
more, more, more, more, more, because sometimes our other, it's got to be all right. The thing I've
had been looking for must happen, I hope. But of course it never does. Now if you live that way.
Because when all your goals in life are attained and the top of your profession or you've got
a beautiful children or whatever it was you wanted, you feel the same as you always felt.
You're still looking for something in the future. And there isn't any future.
Not really. And therefore I often say that only people who live in a proper relationship to the material present
have any use for making any plans at all, because then the plans work out, then they are capable of enjoying them, the other people aren't.
And so people then who aren't here fully, but whose minds are off somewhere else all the time are always
starved and always rushing to get there. And there's nowhere to go except here.
But I qualified this word material present because of the fact that the word material is a very
much misunderstood word. It's a word you can use in a lot of different ways.
As generally used we say the body, the earth, the rocks, the trees, the animals, and all that are material.
And we set over against that the spiritual or the mental. As if that were some kind of
vaguely gaseous world permeating the material world, or perhaps not gaseous, but rather abstract,
a world of ideas, a world of principles. But it's so curious that when people do that,
they are debase both the material and the spiritual domains of life.
Because these domains of life have vitality only when they're together.
When you see the material as the spiritual and the spiritual as the material.
And then both of these concepts tend to vanish. Because what we call the material world in this
putdown sense of the word material is only a concept. If you want to conceive the world as material,
then that means really people who do conceive it as material in that sense of the word material.
Haven't got a good relationship to it. But if you have an immediate relationship, if you really are
aware of the present, then your vision of the material world is transformed.
And you see that it isn't material, it isn't spiritual. It's indefensible.
It's what there is. And there is no way of saying what that is,
because you can't put it into a particular category. And you can only define
what you can classify. Now I know that is perhaps a little bit of a difficult
idea to master because of our confusions of language. We could, if I might try put it in one more way,
I would say probably that the correct use of the word material is to mean something like
metad measured. When we say something's immaterial, we can mean both that it doesn't matter.
That is to say it doesn't measure up to anything, it doesn't meetad. Or that it's spiritual.
Non-material, immaterial. So I would say the correct use of the word material
is the world as measured. The world as represented in pounds, miles,
decibels, photons, or whatever. And that of course is abstract.
Because when you measure the world, you don't really make any difference to it.
Just as the equator does not cut the world into pieces. So what is the world that is
existing upon which our measures are imposed? What is it that
underlies the network? The network of measurements of classifications of quantification?
Well, you can't say, you can point to it, but you can't really say what it is.
It is not a what? But that is what's here. I mean that's what that's the world we're actually living
in, see? What Cajibski called the unspeakable world. And so when I said the material present,
I was using the word material in an incorrect sense, not the measured present, but the physical
present of actual non-verbal being. And people therefore who do not relate well to this,
become incompetent in the practical arts of life. They become bad cooks, bad lovers,
bad architects, bad potters, bad closures, because they really have no love for anything,
except abstractions, money, quantities, status, symbols. And people become absolutely
bamboozled by symbols. And so want the symbol rather than what is signified by the symbol.
But you see, however, if you want what is signified by the symbol, then you've got the universe
by the tail, because everything that is symbolized by a symbol is inseparable from the whole universe.
In other words, you catch a fish. It's not just a thing called a fish that you got.
You are being fed by all oceans when you catch a fish. You are being sustained by this colossal
life, and everything of course that goes with the oceans. It's as if the ocean reached out and
fed you. And that's why the real reason for giving thanks, giving it meals.
That cost in the West people thank God. But it's a more concrete expression to thank the fish.
But then of course you're thanking the ocean. And so on.
So this attitude now of a new vision of nature, not as something chopped up into bits,
so that we could look upon the universe as an assemblage of things, as if somehow or other.
There's all this collection of galaxies and stuff floating around. Where would they come from?
Or they sort of have been washed out like flots of ingets and have come together by some sort of gravity.
And here they are spinning around. As if it was a collection in the sense of something gathered that formally hadn't been gathered.
Of course, astronomically, this isn't taken seriously. People think rather that it all blew up
that all the galaxies expanded from a center and are still going. It's far more likely.
Maybe they'll come back together again. And then blow up once more. Who knows? Maybe they'll all fade out.
But then things will be where they were before it all started. And what happened once can always happen again.
Palsation, you see, is the very nature of life. Big pulses and tiny pulses,
pulses within pulses, forever and ever.
So this point of view is one which has flourished in the far east,
where the relationship of man to the physical world has been very different from our idea.
And this raises some curious problems. Because the great civilizations of the Far East, particularly the Chinese and the Japanese,
did not until coming into contact with Europe and the United States, did not evolve at technology.
And because they didn't evolve at technology, they had all kinds of problems for which we say.
That made them backward. They had problems of disease and famine and poverty.
And we say, well, the poor, the United Chinese, they, they, we have nothing to learn from them.
Because their civilization didn't do the things we've done. But what we don't realize so readily is that this technology, which we've produced, is very recent.
It is only in the middle of the 19th century, that we really got going with this.
And note that before that date, we permitted, as perfectly ordinary procedures, judicial torture,
slavery, child labor,
filth of unspeakable proportions and plagues and all that sort of thing was just the way it was
anywhere else in the world in Europe. But we've forgotten it, we have short memory.
We could sing in church, all things bright and beautiful, all creatures great and small, all things wise and wonderful, the Lord God made them all.
The rich man in his castle, the poor man at his gate. He made them high and lowly and ordered their estate.
Now that verse is today eliminated from him. Because it's saying you see that the stations of life
fortune and misfortune riches and poverty are God given. And since nothing could be done about it.
And people tend to accept states of affairs about which nothing could be done.
And nothing could be done about it until the Industrial Revolution.
And then of course, the minute that starts, everybody wants it. The Chinese wanted, the Indians wanted, the Japanese wanted, and so on.
But the Chinese for some reason or other, you see, did not develop technology. Now why didn't they?
Why did we? There isn't any simple answer to that question.
About one thing that we should note, there are various geographical reasons.
And this is not the only reason. But when you look at the map of Europe,
you will notice that it's very wiggly. It's full of inlets, harbours and all like this, see?
China, by contrast, is a great solid land mass. So is India.
The Europeans were preeminently sailors and it is highly possible to begin with
that all the great early technical discoveries
were the work of
seafaring people. This is one of Buckman's the fullest theories.
That in quite ancient times, there were rather independent seagulling people
who had their own culture, who knew that the world was round,
who had great navigators. And from them, we learn such things as the hoist, cranes,
that the first real houses were overturned boats, and that trade, and the cross-fertilization
of different civilizations and different cultures was a work of sea travel.
With the machinery necessary for sea travel, you're not depending on a horse,
you're depending upon something a human being is made, and upon a very high form of technology,
because sailing is a direct exemplification of man and nature in cooperation.
Rowing is different. Rowing is a rather unintelligent way of propelling a boat,
because it requires a great deal of effort. But sailing is so skillful because you are simply
using the energy of nature to move the boat. You are flowing through nature,
effortlessly, by using the forces around you in a clever way. When you want to go against the
wind you tack, you get the wind to blow you into it. And this is what is called in Chinese,
Wu Wei, meaning literally non-interference or non-aggression. Sometimes translated,
non-action, but that isn't quite correct. Wu Wei is acting in accordance with the field of
forces in which you find yourself. Therefore, in splitting wood, you split with the grain,
because that is the way the course of things that Tao is arranged. So any skillful person will therefore
always inquire, what is the nature of the field of forces in which I find myself? The Chinese
would ask, what is it's lee, and the word lee means, what is the organic pattern of this situation?
And then act in accordance with it. Don't ever force it. Suppose then you are sawing,
you will find that if you push the saw, you will keep make a jagged cut and you will get impatient.
When any people saw wood impatiently, they always make a method. But the saw has its own weight.
And if you get the sensation that the saw is doing the work, let's see, it's not quite true,
your muscles are involved, but you get the sensation of the saw doing the work. Then you will make
a good cut, see that the saw is sharp, and let it do the job for you. You will find in all crafts
that the same kind of thing happens. When anybody develops consummate skill,
when you sing well, you get the sensation that the song is singing itself.
When you drive well, somehow the car and the road are carrying you along.
But in a very skillful way, this is this thing I was remarking on at first. This new feeling
of a relationship to the world. And what you're doing when you do anything skillfully, you see.
You are expressing the total power of the field of forces, which is expressing itself in the form of
skillful action through the agency of you as a human organism. But it requires intelligence
to do this. Now, what is intelligence? Well, I'm going to reserve that question. I just want
to go back a bit to the Chinese. Why didn't they evolve technology? Well, they knew an awful lot of
things. Joseph need him is writing a seven-volume history of science and civilization in China.
Telling us all about their mathematics, their astronomy, their physics, their
husbandry ideas, everything in the way of techniques that the Chinese evolved.
About there were two reasons why they didn't go on to technology as we have it. One of them,
the bad reason, I think, and the other good reason. Confucian thought is not interested in nature.
It is humanistic, interested in human relations, but very scholastic because it's based on a
literature. In other words, the great Confucian classics exercised a
rejidifying effect upon Chinese culture, even though they were a great principle of order of social
order. But just in the same way, is when you get any scripture, the Bible, the Korang,
science and health with key to the scriptures. Anything like that, and people set that up,
that's the authority. Then you're stuck. Then you get the situation of the astronomers who said
the theologians who said to Galileo, we won't look through your telescope because it already says
in the book, how the universe is working, and the book can't be wrong. We know people who get
stuck on books, always think they know. And it's happening today when somebody advances and
absolutely outrageous proposition for science. Lots of scientists are so blind they say,
well, that's impossible. It couldn't be because many scientists aren't true scientists. They
are rigidly defending a conception of the universe, which requires that everything be as dull as possible,
that the universe be absolutely boring and stupid above all. And therefore anything that reveals
something that science can't account for, some events or all events that science can't account for,
a simply ignored. Then Charles Ford was a man who devoted his life to collecting records of events
and the currencies, which there is no reasonable scientific explanation as yet. And the trouble is
all these events are rather unusual because science only studies the usual. And you have to have
an event happen several times in order to study it scientifically, say, well, it happened and we all
cite. And then the scientist comes in like, you know, and you get sick and you call in the doctor
and all the symptoms vanish. And so you're Karg is wrong. And you take it to the mechanic and
nobody can make it, make that funny noise it was making it so on. So in the same way, the scientist comes
around and says, well, you say you saw this thing happen. Well, I'll observe it. What it won't happen.
So this is the problem, you see, the confusions got to hang up on books. That is to say on a theoretical
system, and just the same way that we hang up on our abstract concept of nature. And operating
in terms of an abstract concept of nature, which is taught to us in school, and in which we
are brought up, so much so that we are absolutely hypnotized by it. And we can't experience things
which our conceptual system doesn't provide for. When the concept system stops working,
because it no longer fits the constantly changing pattern of reality, we're in trouble.
Well, that, of course, was the trouble for the Chinese. Their confusion concept system
had very serious limitations. Now, that was the bad reason. There was another reason why they didn't
evolve a technology, which was daoist. The daoists were really interested in nature.
If you read their writings in the Laozi and the Drunkter, they are full of natural illustrations,
the behavior of water, of insects, of the elements, are all used as illustrations of the art of life.
Now, the confusions in contrast to daoists were lexicographers. They believed in what's
called the rectification of names. The language, in other words, mustn't get out of hand.
There must be very clear and rigid definitions so that we would use words the right way. Now,
the daoists had a critique of this. They said, with what words will you define the words?
And with what words will you define the words that you use the ones to define with? Obviously,
the situation is circular. Every dictionary is really a vicious circle, because it's words defined
in terms of other words, and they're all the words in the dictionary, so that say you take
a dictionary that has no pictures in it, to someone who doesn't know the language, it's absolutely
a closed system that you can't penetrate. I once thought as a little boy, I was going to write
a fundamental book, which would contain the necessary fundamentals for knowledge.
And the first thing I naturally did there was to write down the alphabet. Then I wanted to write
down how it was pronounced. And I saw that I couldn't possibly write down how it was pronounced.
I needed to know from the living world how to sound a, b, c, d. And that could never be written down.
So I was stuck at the start. I get badly the project at once.
So the Taoists laughed at the Confucians on that account, but also they felt that nature was organic.
It was a, they saw so vividly that it was a single living organism of immense complexity.
And thus they never thought of it as consisting of separate parts.
Just as the head goes with the feet, and as a stomach goes with the brain,
they arise mutually, together they are different but not separate. And therefore they were very
cautious about interfering with anything. Furthermore, their theory of politics was quite different from
the Confucians. Confucian politics is based on the idea of rulership. There is the Emperor.
There is the, the family, which is strictly hierarchical structure of authority from above,
which must be followed and obeyed by those below. But the Taoists, when they, the first book,
the Dowder Jing, is a manual of advice to the Emperor among other things.
And what it says to the Emperor is, don't rule. Because the Great Dow flows everywhere,
both to the right and to the left. It loves and nourishes all things but does not laud it over them.
And when merits are accomplished, it makes no claim to them. Therefore the Emperor is to be retiring
to disappear, to be rather more like in our own local government, the sanitary engineer than
the mayor, to have a kind of anonymous quality of being underground and of being the one who
allows a democracy. Because the Taoist feeling is that you get cooperation people from people
best by letting them cooperate rather than compelling them to. Now they, contrast this with a
Western theory in which the world is seen not as an organism but as a mechanism. Now what's the
difference? A mechanism has replaceable parts. It is fundamentally an assemblage of parts, an organism
isn't. Furthermore, a mechanism has a governor and an organism a pound it doesn't.
It may have a network of governors all working together in a kind of reticulate pattern.
But take a, for example, does the brain run the body or does the stomach?
Which is the more important? Well, there is two schools at all. The stomach people say,
well, stomachs are really fundamental. They were what would be their first because an organism
really eating is the important thing. But the brain helps the stomach find food. That's what
it's really doing. It evolved in order to develop eyes and ears to sneak around and find out things
to swallow. So that's the stomach theory. The brain theory is that it's true that the brain
is perhaps a later development than the stomach. But that means that the stomach was just the
forerunner for the really important character to arrive on the scene and all the stomach does is it
gives fuel to the brain and the operations of the brain in terms of culture and all that sort of
thing are what life is really all about. Now actually both theories are right and both are wrong.
The arrangement between the head and the stomach is mutual. They arise together.
Now in a system which has a boss it's different. When you've got the mechanism
and the chauffeur or the engineer who puts it together and operates it, then you have a government.
You have a monarchical world order. And when you have government and things can be viewed as happening
in a mechanical order, look they change it. I order you to behave differently.
Do it this way instead. And how do we do that? Why we apply mechanical techniques? Chop
off heads or force people to do this that and the other I mean just separate things up and
rearrange them. So then because in the West we went through the phase of Newtonian mechanics
which arises out of the theory that the physical world is an artifact that it was made
by an architect or in a super cosmic engineer and governed from above by law.
We thought up the idea of explaining the behavior of things by mechanical cosality
and this led to technology, to steam entrance, to automobiles,
to hydraulic systems, everything electricity. But when we reached a certain point in that development
we started wondering we decided discovering all kinds of processes for which the mechanical
analogy was not adequate. It did us up, it did us well up to a point. But now in quantum theory
and in biology in these two things in particular an organic way of looking at things is clearer
is nearer to the way they're operating in a mechanical way. And therefore they say the philosophy
of whitehead is probably the greatest organises in the West. Reads just like the philosophy of
drungser. It's the same view as the world. So that somehow just at this moment of the development
of technology when we suddenly see it's a lot more complicated than we thought it was.
And that our project to change the universe is not going to be as easy as even HTML's imagined.
It's just at this moment that this Chinese wisdom becomes available to the West
and we can understand it because it's now talking our language.
It's talking of the language of relativity. The whole drungser book starts out and then
absolutely marvellous chapter on relativity. Relativity of the opposites. The interdependence,
the mutual interpenetration of everything that happens and we've discovered it. So there is
possible then, isn't there at this point in history? I've civilising technology.
Let's put it that way. You could almost say naturalising technology. Technology came in as a barbarian.
Very competent barbarian. All steely. All glittering with force of arms.
And technology is busy transforming the face of the earth into its own image, which is the image of a machine.
Covering the earth with concrete. But good technologies know that these freeways will be
obsolete in the not-too-distant future. Grasp will grow up through the cracks and they will vanish.
Because we shall take to the air like insects.
And all our wires and cables, all our terrible stuff will vanish.
Because we shall be able to transmit electric power without using them.
We shall abandon telephones. Suddenly, as it were, the whole
mechanical structure will vanish because it was only a step
what the shardanko is a pedunko. When you got an amoeba separating, it goes apart and there's a
thin little like an hourglass neck joining them. And then they separate and so there are still
two little pear-shaped tops facing each other and gradually they withdraw and their balls once again.
And while those little neck and the two predicting pieces, those are pedunkos.
And the pedunko disappears in the cost of evolution. Like the umbilical cord is a pedunko.
And so all this contraption that we've devised technologically is a pedunko and it will vanish.
Because as we really go about it, we are going to get so that we don't need houses practically.
We're going to find ways of, you know, just altering the temperature in the air and living in a grass hut or under a
more an invisible plastic dome. And spread it all so that we don't concentrate in cities.
You don't have to. You can just sit and you can dial any book in the library of Congress.
And read it on a screen in front of you.
All sorts of things like that to be done.
So that this also, time be in the study of history, pointed out, that we will become increasingly independent
of tracks, roads, wires, zone, so that the civilization becomes airborne.
Maybe it'll even go so far and here I'm getting into science fiction.
As abandoning the electronic method of communication, we may get a telepathic one instead.
Who knows? Be a funny world, won't it, when there's no private thoughts?
Everybody is completely transparent to everybody else.
Sure I have to get alarm.
Although as a matter of fact, this distribution will facilitate privacy.
Because the thing that really militates against privacy is the city.
And the controls of huge traffic of human beings going about their business.
This is a real problem. This is invasion.
So then, will this, however, this technical type of development,
in order to go along those lines,
requires that people who are responsible for technical development,
be well imbued with an ecological philosophy and see the direction of things.
So they will not keep perpetuating an acronym.
If, for example, the automobile is an hopeless acronym with a gasoline engine,
but it's going to be very difficult to get rid of it.
Because people want to sell oil.
Or because the machine tools would have to be completely made over,
it would be terribly difficult for the industry to change.
And therefore we get an acronym.
Which blind us to ingenuity and ability to see what could be done instead.
You may think that sounds communist.
It isn't at all because nothing is more of an acronym than an acronym than a bureaucracy.
A collective estate, in other words, is the most hopeless thing to change.
Because nobody has any responsibility.
It is not organic. It's a monolithic machine.
That's the pattern that we see in so-called communist countries.
And they have just a tougher time producing an innovation as in as we do.
We have to think of new political ideas all together.
Ideas have been never been heard of.
But the way of thinking about politics as of thinking about techniques is by an organic model instead of
the mechanical model. The world has won body, but a body you see is a highly diversified system.
With all kinds of division of function and yet all one, it is not like an ant hill.
It's much more differentiated.
And that is the human image, just distinct from say the insect image.
All the machine image.
The problem I was discussing this morning was really the relationship of ecology to technology.
But I was discussing it in a historical way.
Raising the problem of why technology originated in the West and not for example in China.
And showing first of all that those people in China who did make some progress in the study of nature.
The Taoists thought about the world in accordance with a different model than people in the West.
A model that did not immediately permit of technological development.
The West thought about nature by analogy with mechanics, with machines.
The Chinese thought about nature by analogy with organisms.
A machine is something which can be taken apart and reordered.
Something which is the product of an active engineering and is therefore an organization with a
governor. An organism is not made piecemeal, it grows and doesn't have a governor.
All the parts in an organism are in an orderly anarchy.
That is to say they govern themselves and the Chinese word for nature.
That means that which is so of itself.
Therefore that which functions without being pushed around by some external force.
It is automatic but not as we mean the word automatic.
We mean a self-governing machine and there's a certain difference here.
So the problem then is if the Chinese viewing the world as an organism felt on the hole that it was
wiser to restrain ones interference with things.
That is to say there are certain situations in which the human being should simply lay hands off.
There are other situations in which the human being collaborates with nature.
But he does so by virtue of having greater awareness of the field of forces in which he is situated.
This takes us back of course to the point that I made right at the beginning.
That you really are the field of forces in which you are and which your organism is situated.
Self-realization is in fact realizing as a sensuous experience that you are that field of forces
that you are both your outside and your inside.
Which of course leads us to something that we can experience but cannot define.
And we can't define it for two reasons.
One is it's too complicated and another reason is even deeper than that.
It leads us to the root and ground of reality.
That is to say the I'm only speaking in analogical terms the continuum in which all things exist
which can't be thought about as an object because it can't be classified.
You can't say anything really meaningful about it at all but it's tremendously important to know that you're it.
That's the real you because if you don't know that you go crazy.
You become dementedly absorbed in details.
Identifying yourself for the purely temporal and indeed in somewhat respect arbitrary role which you're playing.
And you forget that even if you do lose your shirt in this game it doesn't matter in this round.
Because at that level there's no winner and no loser.
So the question we come to now is well how do you go about knowing the field of forces in which you live?
How do you know which way the wind is blowing so that you can sail properly when it isn't a simple
matter as wetting your finger and holding it up and see which side gets cold first and that's where the wind's coming from.
Or is it as simple as that?
We know or think we know that nature is extraordinarily complicated and so very difficult to understand
and if you can't understand a very complicated situation it's immensely difficult to make decisions about it.
But there is a point of view from which nature is not complicated and that to a educated
Westerner may sound quite astonishing.
When Buddhists speak in their philosophy about the world of the world of form
and the world that is formless, these two categories correspond roughly to the world as complicated and the world as simple.
What makes the world complicated is not its actual physical structure
but it attempt to understand it in a certain way.
When you ask how does it work, why does it do it?
Then you start analyzing a flower, a body, a geological structure and you are asking the question really
how can I reproduce in words or numbers what is going on here?
In such a way that I can predict what it will do next.
Now the trouble with words and numbers is that they have some peculiar limitations.
It takes time to read. It takes longer still to listen to a tape recording.
And to scan a mathematical expression, again, it is something strong out in the line
and you have to think carefully to understand the various steps which have been taken.
So these are methods of breaking down the phenomena of nature.
Into a code, these codes can be handled by computers with astonishing speed.
But the part of the human mind which we are mainly concerned with, which is the conscious mind,
can only handle them very slowly because the conscious mind has to work in terms of symbols,
verbal and mathematical, which are really very clumsy.
So that by the time we have really thought about something, it's usually too late to do anything about it.
The circumstances have changed. The crisis about which we had to make a decision has already happened.
And therefore we have to act without the kind of preparation we think we ought to have
and without the kind of knowledge we think we ought to have.
Because we cannot comprehend the world in verbal patterns.
As a result of that, we always feel frustrated.
We think we are supposed to comprehend the world that way and manage it that way.
And a lot of people are not satisfied until you've given them an explanation.
But it should be obvious that there never will be an explanation.
In those terms, in the terms of words,
because you can talk about the simplest object in the world forever and not fully describe its attributes.
Words have a use, but they only have that use when they are operating in subordination
to a kind of understanding that doesn't depend on words at all.
Words are like claws on the end of an arm.
And the claws are no good and less subordinate to the more subtle organization of the arm and the rest of the body.
So words are the claws in which we tear life to pieces and arrange it in certain ways.
Just as you have to bite and therefore separate the bits of a piece of meat in order to digest them.
So to make the world a digestible in a certain way, you need to claw it apart.
But actually, we do all kinds of acts of understanding along with words which are not contained in the words.
A person to get your point does many many non-verbal operations.
For example, to read a book requires that I be able to see and seeing is a non-verbal operation.
When you try to put it into words, you come up against barriers of all kinds.
It is a very difficult thing to describe.
But that's only because you are trying to describe it in a difficult way.
It's the same product problem if you want to unload the bathtub as the drain is stopped.
And you take out the water with a fork. It will take forever.
But if you bring in a pale, it will be a lot faster.
And there is something in trying to describe the world in words.
It is rather like trying to move water with a fork.
It is efficient, in other words, for some purposes.
But words, again, I point out, they communicate only to those who already know what you mean
to him that half shall be given.
And for that reason, they are convenient because then we can remind each other in common by words
of things that we already know, but water, as a word, means nothing to people who haven't experienced
water. Once they have experienced it, the word is useful because it is like using money instead of
water. I can discuss water with you without having to bring some into the room and show it to you.
So words provide this kind of a short hand.
And very much in so many ways, they have the advantages and disadvantages of money.
Money helps us to transfer wealth, words help us to
organize experience and communicate about it with each other.
But beyond that, when we try to put our experience into words,
and in terms of words comprehend experience, then we run into insupurable difficulties.
Not so long ago, a professor at Harvard, in discussing the heresy of certain members of the faculty,
who were conducting experiments in terms of change states of consciousness,
said that nothing is academically known knowledge is academically respectable knowledge,
which cannot be put into words. I don't know what became the department of physical education.
About, or not to mention, fine arts and things like that and music. But still,
this is what he said, and that's what lots of people feel, people who are in the scientific
technological world, but obviously is a type of intelligence that is not verbal or computational intelligence.
The eye, the brain, the organization of a plant, are obviously intelligent.
What do I mean, intelligent? I say they're obviously intelligent because anyone can see it.
Not, I would even go so far to say, they are not products of intelligence.
As if some intelligent fellow had been around and left this as a kind of track of his competence,
the growth of a plant is intelligence itself, and intelligence is naturally something that,
in words, would always escape definition in the same way as the nervous system upon which intelligence
depends is incomprehensible even to the neurologist.
We know intelligence when we see it, because we say it's fascinating.
My isn't that tricky. How ingenious? What a wonderful organization. How beautiful.
And we recognize in the patterns of nature that this is happening. So when you see a human being
and you say, what a piece of work is man. This extraordinary, the beauty of the eyes,
the marvelous organization and coordination of the limbs. But then you realize that this is you,
but you don't know how you work it, and you do work it.
So what it comes to is this, that in your total organization and nervous system,
you are expressing a kind of intelligence that is when looked at from the point of view of
conscious analysis, unsinkably complex. And yet from its own point of view, it's perfectly simple.
Because you don't have to make an effort to see. You just see. You don't have to make an effort to hear.
The ear does it for you. You don't have to make an effort to hold yourself together.
The body holds you together. You do have to make an effort to get food.
Sometimes to keep warm. Sometimes to defend yourself. So some effort is always involved.
And in a certain way, the heart, for example, which we don't think about, it does work.
And it consumes energy. But you don't have the sensation of making a decision every time your heart beats.
Some you see people who are studying music probably the wrong way.
Have to make a decision every time they play a note so it's to stay on time to play the right note.
And then they get absolutely worn out. Because it's decision after decision after decision.
And there's nothing more wearing than that. Because with every decision goes anxiety,
was it the right decision? There is no way of avoiding that. Because if you are going to decide
with the ordinary responsible way of making decisions that we are supposed to do, you never know
whether you made a right decision or not. Until the event about which you've decided is passed.
Because you never know how much information you need to collect to make the right decision.
Whether you did indeed collect enough. And whether the information you collected was relevant.
And also you realize that every possible decision can be radically affected by unforeseeable variables.
Such that you've completed a contract with a business corporation.
And everything is in order. But you had no means of knowing that the president of that corporation upon
whom you depended was going to slip on a banana skin and have a serious accident.
There would be no way whatsoever for seeing that eventuality. Should you take out an out an insurance policy on
how comprehensive can an insurance policy be? Is it worth taking out an insurance policy?
What are the chances of unforeseeing events occurring of such significance and in such number
that this sort of insurance policy is worthwhile and you're not just wasting money on paying the premiums?
In the long run, in the long run, all insurance is a swindle.
You should read Ambrose Bierce's book, The Devil's Dictionary. He has the most subtle
and extremely logical demolition of insurance. But in the short run, in a kind of chancey way,
you see it sometimes pays off. But you see, this is the problem, the anxiety with which we are faced
in trying to conduct our lives by the exercise of conscious will and control.
We realize that it is really beyond our comprehension. We don't understand.
We cannot foresee all eventualities. And therefore, this sense of frustration through
trying to control things gives us a feeling of existence, which for thousands of years, men have
called the fall. And the idea that there has been a fall, that something has been lost,
is universal and very ancient. In the Darwin's literature of China,
there are constant references to a sort of golden age. Lout says,
when the great Tao lost, in other words, when things did not always and automatically go
in accordance with the course of nature, there arose duty to man and write conduct.
When the six family relationships fell apart, there was talk of
three real sons and daughters and faithful wives. When ministers became corrupt,
then only did one here of loyal ministers and wise councillors.
Now, therefore, when things have fallen apart, somebody gets up and starts preaching.
And if there is one thing quite clear from history, it is that preaching does no one any good.
It makes only hypocrites because if I tell you that you ought to be concerned and you ought to be
unselfish and you ought to co-operate and you ought to be responsible and because I am
apply to you that you are not. You will, but in the first place, be resentful that I have
had to tell you that and you will feel guilty. But now you are under the impression that you
really and indeed are a separate self with the power to perform all these virtues.
And you then go through the motions of doing what you were told to do in the sun.
You are, in this case, then, and he goes sentry can selfish person pretending that you aren't.
And the truth will always out because in the long run you will let down the people who are relying
on you to be what you are not. And we have the most subtle ways of letting people down.
While apparently going through the motions of doing exactly what they expect of us,
yes, we can be so pure, but so cruel, so loving, but so demanding. So, why is it so dull?
So, that we take it out on others when we feel that we are forced into doing things for them
that are against our own nature. And we do that invariably, but we do our very best not to be
conscious of the way in which we do it because that would punch the whole balloon and show it up
for a farce and we can't afford that. So, there is then this feeling of nostalgia for the golden age.
When we have the feeling that it once upon a time, at some point, and this may refer back to
childhood, it may refer back to life in the womb, it may refer back to primitive conditions
before the invention of language and writing and numbers, but somehow there is a feeling that
we get especially from contemplating animals. They don't worry very much.
They seem to follow their nature. They don't seem to go through a decision-making process,
just as you don't go through a decision-making process when you sneeze, or when you breathe,
or when you blink, it just happens, and it's just as well that it does.
So, the thought of curse to us, would it not be possible to conduct our life in that way always?
And instead of making these pathetic decisions on the basis of utterly incomplete information,
wouldn't there be some way in which we could manage to do the right thing that is to say,
to respond appropriately within the field of forces in which we are living and which we are?
Without these clums it attempts to do so by force and by will.
That, of course, is what Taoist philosophy is considering all the time,
and it is trying to point out that there is in fact a way of living like that.
Only nobody will believe it because they are scared out of their wits that it went work.
And, of course, you have to ask all sorts of questions as to what you mean by work.
But surely it should be obvious that if you are organically intelligent enough to be able to see,
isn't that just the faint possibility that the kind of intelligence which enables you to perform
the incomprehensible operation of seeing, might also be of use if it could be
canalized and invoked in solving other problems as well.
Isn't there a possibility in other words that the human brain is not a muscle
but a fantastic electronic contrivance like a computer,
which does not think in words, but thinks in terms of neurological operations,
which are never conscious.
That is to say they are never attended to in detail, that's what consciousness is.
In other words, that thinking is not basically only a small part of thinking is a verbal process.
The greater part of thinking is a physical process, but it's a highly organised process
and when thought about in words is a very, very complicated one, but we do it
and it's the simplest thing in the world to do it because you don't have to decide,
you mean by simple. You don't have to enter into the complexities.
Now, the proposition that this might be so, I have caused the professor to go completely blue
in the face with rage at such a suggestion that it seems so to him, anti-intellectual,
undermining the whole nature and dignity of the academic professions and so forth.
But really and truly, if human beings are to adapt themselves to the increasingly troublesome environment,
which they are creating, isn't it possible that we are
not really trusting ourselves or using ourselves to the full to come to an understanding of our problems?
You say a lot of people say, oh, well, that sounds like the people who isn't to say, oh,
ask God to help you and he'll do it. He'll think about, he knows.
But that's not the case, you see? In other cases, it's asking you to do it.
But see, if you have started out with a definition of yourself, which really has very little to do with you at all,
which is this kind of joke that you are an ego and that you, some sort of,
being inside a bag and that you're in control and that you're the boss of this bag, or at least supposed to be.
In the same way as the chauffeur in charge of the car or the engineer who makes the machine,
you might possibly be that if you knew how the whole thing was constructed, but the whole point is you don't.
But if you could revise your view of yourself, who you are and realize that you are the field of forces
with their patterning and with their incredible intelligence, and you trust yourself to decide,
to respond in other words spontaneously to a situation.
Instead of going through this whole thing of, what is the right thing to do?
But you see, if you have been brought up in a civilisation,
inured to the doctrine of original sin, you cannot possibly trust yourself.
In fact, you see what happens is this. We know that an airline pilot is a fallible being,
and when he is driving a jet, things are happening much too fast,
for him to make up his mind if he has to make a decision. Therefore increasingly,
we put in all sorts of automated decision-making machines on a jet plane.
Eventually, the pilot loses his confidence in himself. More and more, because he doesn't know how
the damn thing works, he is sitting there. The famous story about the time when they have
supersonic rockets, and you get on board, and the tape recorder says,
you are now taking off a London, where we will be arriving in half an hour.
All facilities on this aircraft are fully automated, there is no chance of human error,
and therefore no need to worry, to worry, to worry.
But you see, we can do a rather good job in eliminating error by use of the computer.
In rather limited circumstances, why? Because the computer, as it develops, is more like a nervous
system than it is like a linguistic system. In other words, it is able to deal with ever
so many operations at once, and to synthesize them. And words can't do that. Words have to
go along a single track. Now then, if the brain is still far more sophisticated than any computer,
we can yet construct. What is the limitation on human skill? Is that a human being isn't using
his brain in the right way? He is not really using it to the full at all, except in some peculiar
beings whom we call geniuses. And the funny thing about geniuses is they cannot explain why they are
geniuses. They can't teach it. Here is the case in John says book of a wheel right. He makes
them as beautiful wheels. And the trick of a wheel is to get it to fit the heart, the axle.
It mustn't be so loose that it wobbles, and it mustn't be so tight that it sticks. It has
to have just the right thing, and he says here I've been doing this for years. But I do not know
how I do it, so I can't teach my son, and so I'm still working when I was 75 years old.
And this is an eternal problem of all fine craftsmen and skilled people. Is they cannot explain
how it's done. This was my problem as a small boy in school, because when I started out in school
around the when I was 7, 8, 9 years old, I was considered stupid, because I always failed in
examinations and got terrible marks. But at the same time I was absolutely fascinated with the
bookish process. I collected books. I loved books. I loved the smell of books. I like the look of them.
And but nobody really got across what you were supposed to do with them. I mean I could read them.
I used to think, well, they used to say you don't work. You know, like saying that this watch doesn't
work. I said to the teachers, I want to work very badly, but how do you do it?
They had no explanation. So I used to look at exemplars of intelligence, some of the teachers,
who might admire, and I thought maybe I can find out how to do it by imitating the way they do their
handwriting. Or by wearing clothes the way they were them, or by making the same sort of gestures,
or by speaking in that sort of way, that by some sort of sympathetic magic I would acquire
the mysterious power, which I seem to lack. In the same way, I remember from childhood again that
our nurses in a hospital, sanitariums or homes had a very very peculiar anxiety about constipation.
In fact, that was about the criterion of health, was that you were not constipated.
Therefore, you had to do your duty as they called it every day, and if you didn't,
there was a graduated series of punishments. It started with a concoction called california
syrup of things. It went next to a thing called sanitarium. It went next to cascara,
and finally to cast oil, which is disgusting stuff. The trouble is that if they resort to that,
you'll get back in a vicious circle, because the whole muscular system is upset, and so you begin
all over again. Now, what they mistake that they all made was to issue a commandment to the
conscious mind, to achieve a result, which the conscious mind is perfectly incapable of producing.
The conscious mind has nothing to do with whether you are constipated or not.
That has to do with the unconscious, or I prefer to call it the super conscious,
because it's a lot more clever than the conscious mind is. Indeed, it's a great deal more trustworthy.
Only we don't believe that because we believe in original sin, and therefore the unconscious
can't be trusted, and if it wants to take a day off or so from going to the bathroom,
we think it's sinful, or something wrong with it.
And that attitude, you see, that was reflected in this rather trivial little illustration,
ran through everything. You must love us. You must be free. You must make the right decision.
It's up to you. You've got to do it, see. Well, of course, as a result of that, one or two things happens.
Most people simply lose their nerve. They realize, I've got to make the right decision, but I can't.
Therefore, they drop out. They become a lot of people who just say the whole thing is just too much
it's absurd, and they become low-grade intelligences, or so, we think. Then there's another kind of people
who grit the teeth, they pull themselves together, and they resolute this smash into this
way of existence. And they get rewarded accordingly. That is to say, they get more and more
power. They succeeded in this game of being God. And so, society rewards them, you see,
by saying, well, you'll be President, you'll be the CB, that'll be the other thing.
It looks fine, looks great, everything's going beautifully. But we've only seen the beginning of it.
As it goes on, I say, well, we've got to control this, we've got to control that. You didn't think
of that one before did you? Now, we can avoid them to stake if we get that out of control. Yeah, this one fix.
And I say, now, wait a minute, I can't think about all that. We're going to hand all that problem
to this computer, which we've got here. We'll keep an eye on that one corner and we'll get that
deciding about this. And so, all these in aides to intelligence come along. But at the center of
it all, as a guy who thinks he's in charge with his conscious intellect. And so soon, he begins to feel
more and more responsible. And because he's making a mess anyhow, I mean, just imagine being
the President of the United States. You don't know where you're going, you've got all these decisions
to make. You haven't got any private life at all because there's a telephone here and a secret
service man there and a secretary there and a listener there. And we hear it goes. But whatever you do,
it doesn't make a slightest difference. What? Everything. Everybody's objecting. Everybody's saying,
you mustn't do it that way. You've forgotten this. You are a so-and-so and they call you names
and everything. The only way of insulating yourself to that is to plug your ears. But then you
can't get any information at all. Cut off the phone, you know. Then you're stuck. Because
you see, this is the fate that comes to anybody who tries to be God in the wrong way. Everybody
is God actually. So there's no need to try to be. But the moment somebody tries to be, that means
he wants to be God from the standpoint of the very limited faculty of conscious thinking and deciding,
which is a very clumsy agency for controlling what happens in the world. That you're never going to
be God that way. As if God just figured it out, if God had to think about every motion that a
net made with its wings in order to see that it happened. Why would he be tired? What an
other spraped down. That would be. Well, you can say, only God could do it. It was the way of saying
the whole conception is nonsense. Things like that aren't handled that way. Things like that are
handled the way you and your body handle things, which is that they organize themselves without thinking
about it. That is to say, they have an intelligence, but it's not verbal intelligence. It's not linear
intelligence. It's multidimensional, multivariable intelligence wherein everything all together,
everywhere is happening all at once. And if we don't re-equaint ourselves, shall I say,
with that kind of intelligence, we're going to be in trouble. Now, you see, the point is we have
it. It's all there. But we don't give it a chance. Let's take in social intercourse. We are very,
very controlled. When somebody, you see, conversation goes along in a linear pattern.
And it's a game. Somebody suddenly changes the subject. Now, that has creates a small social crisis.
Because they say, how, wait a minute, we weren't talking about that. You interrupted.
So in order to protect ourselves against that, you say, you wait for a site pause and said,
excuse me for changing the subject, but, and that indicates that you know
that they're not to take you for a madman who thinks associatively, instead of logically,
in a linear development. Now, what happens if you change the rules? And you put a group of people
together for conversation and say, anything comes into your head? Well, that sounds like free association
in psychoanalysis, doesn't it? And what about saying to somebody free associate?
It really, it blocks them. Because they suddenly go blank, which is a warning. Don't move.
Because you can't trust yourself. Don't move, go blank. So to help you along,
the analyst says, did you dream anything last night?
Oh, that's all right. I guess I did have a dream. I tell the story of my dream,
which is a way of kidding yourself. You are making a statement through a dream for which you're
not held responsible, because it was only a dream. You can dare through, through that, say something
about yourself, without admitting that you're saying anything about yourself. And without putting
you, you did the free associating in the dream. You see, the dream was an associative process of thinking
rather than a logical one. And you can describe it because it's safely passed. It's not happening
now. Then he can perhaps draw you out a little further. Say, now, what do you think about that dream?
Well, if your, if the analyst is a Freudian, you know what to think about the dream. All long things.
One thing and all round things and another. And it's as simple as that. If you're a Jungian,
it's not so easy. If the analyst is a Jungian, there's much more complicated. But he to help you out,
saying, well, it's up to you. I don't know what these things mean in your dream. But when you think
of a particular image that occurred in the dream, which was a person, friend, if you all say,
what does that, what does that fellow mean to you? And he tries to get you to see that the person
you dreamed about, actually represents an aspect of yourself. You didn't have a dream about that actual
objective of person out there. But he stands for something in you, which he was associate with him.
So gradually, associative thinking is drawn out from you. There are another thing to do is draw pictures.
That's pretty safe. Just draw anything. You can draw a lot of meaning to start, you know,
and you can do it for a while. And then gradually use it as a raw shot blood. And things begin to
come out. But all this is coaxing people, you see? But in the situation where you are directly
verbalizing spontaneously, it's very embarrassing because words are tremendously powerful in the social
scene. People can be blown to pieces with words and just nothing flat. And say the wrong word and
everybody blushes. Just like that. I produce a clear neurological physiological reaction with nothing
but words. So it's dangerous to get away from the order of words and communicate with people in
an unstructured way. Because that's to some extent what happens in tea groups where things like
the synonym game, where people are somehow encouraged to say anything they like. But it would get
way out indeed, instead of saying to somebody, after all, when I look at you, are you really
annoying me? Something about the expression in your face, which I can't stand. That can become a
stereotype. You can go on with that kind of argument, kind of mutual embarrassing game to
it merely becomes a ritual. But let's suppose that instead of that, we just started talking nonsense.
Or anything goes, it might suddenly stop being nonsense or at any minute change into nonsense.
So that we were immediately withdraw, you see. But on the other hand, if we don't withdraw,
we say, well, all this is going to be words anyway and it's nothing much they can do to us.
So let's see what happens. Let's go on words. Then if we don't withdraw, people begin to feel it
in ease. But after all, I can trust myself. To behave in a non-ego-centric way without
harming others, without creating murder and mayhem and bloodshed, without stealing people's
things. Suddenly, when a group discovers that it can have that kind of lalling, a pentacostor,
glossolaliya bit with each other, there is some possibility might love each other.
That's why this has been done in certain spiritual circles for a long time. And this is why
in Zen Buddhism. There is this game of challenge and response, where you are put in a situation
where if you stop to think what to do, you've lost. And you're out. You only have to try again.
But you never really know what the situation you're going to have to respond to is going to be.
So once upon a time, there was a master who posed a co-on to one of his students,
and a student gave a certain answer and the master accepted it.
The master's assistant after this student had left said to the master,
I'm doubtful about whether he really understood the point there.
Master said, oh really? He said, why don't you try him again? Master said, yes, I win.
So the student came back the following day and he put the same problem to him. And the student
responded the same way. And Master said, no, no, that's wrong. But the student said, you said,
yesterday that it was right. He said, I know, yesterday it's right today, it's wrong.
Because you see every situation is different, it's always changing. And the point is to respond
in a way that is appropriate to the field of forces as it is now. And you cannot tell intellectually,
you can't tell by analysis, you can't tell by a process of conscious criticism,
what the structure of the field of forces is. Your body knows, your brain can find out,
but not through conscious attention and formulation in words. But if you don't trust your brain
to be able to find out, you will fumble. And you will do silly things. And since you have been
habitually brought up, not to trust your brain to find out, to get into a pattern of trying to
behave spontaneously is, of course, to run the danger of making a great fool of yourself.
And that, of course, is indeed what happens in a great many experiments in the arts where people
think they're going to paint spontaneously. They're going to make spontaneous noises with a
musical instrument. They're going to dance spontaneously. They're going to have non-plays on the stage
or happenings where anything goes by and large, these things are colossal failures and a completely boring
and it's perfectly understandable why, with it namely, they are being done by people who don't
really trust themselves and who are doing this in a background of self mistrust.
And who have never, in other words, cultivated because it is a kind of a discipline to trust
yourself and let it happen. But you see when you get a great comedian working, you can't really
train to be a great comedian. And how would you go about it? Would you read all available jokes
of memorizing them? Would you study the great comedians of the past? Remember all their gags,
gestures, expressions. The point is if you did that, everybody would think you were corny.
They would say, oh, that's just not twanging.
Whatever. WC feels. This is good. The whole point of a comedian is the element of surprise.
The unforeseen jokes that nobody expected. The thing that really has people laughing is what they just
didn't quite expect. Now the ability to put this over is something that you either, apparently,
you either have it or you don't. And you also, you have to do it in a situation where you don't know
what's coming up yourself. You could be a comedian in the terms that you've got a script and you've
learned your lines and the script was written by a genius and it's in your good actor and it's very
funny. But if you're in a real comedian situation where people in the audience are interacting with you
and the other words, the situation is unstructured. The real genius is the one who can
pull the gags, just like that. Indeed, they are ad-libbed. That man has got his genuine intelligence
working for him. We come back to the point then that the genius is unable to
say how he manages to do it. He can say, oh, well, yes, I do a lot of hard work. All geniuses too.
But that's not the cause of it. It goes along with it. It's kind of necessary
accompaniment of the art rather than the cause of the art. Because one uses work
to polish something which was a gem in the first place. You see, when you write poetry,
it's a lot of work to get it exact melody and beauty of words takes hours. But you had to
have something there in the first place that wasn't simply the polishing, it was the gem.
So the coming forth of such gems in the same way as cure for constipation is something that
requires trust in one's own inherent and original intelligence.
This was what the Zen Master Bunkay calls your unborn mind that is a way of saying, the mind that you have,
that is not individualized, that is not personalized, that is not the ego. And he would say to people,
when you hear something go, call, you know immediately it's a crow. When you hear something go
ding, you know it once it is a bell. And when he was once heckled by one of those niche erin priests,
you know they are very fanatical, but they run the Soka Gakai movement.
This priest said of standing right in the back of the audience, he said, I don't understand
the word you are saying, the Bunkay said come closer and I will explain it to you. And he moved
in, he said closer still, still closer. The man came forward. He got right up the platform,
Bunkay said how well you understand me.
So in the same way once the military man was with his enmaster. And he said to the master,
I have heard this story that there was a man who kept a goose in a bottle and grew so large
that he couldn't get it out. Now he didn't want to hurt the goose and he didn't want to break
the bottle so how does he get it out. And the zinnmaster changed the subject.
So finally the military man, the officer, got up to leave. And just as he was got his hand on the
screen to go out, the master said, oh officer, and he turned and said yes, the master there, it's out.
Because if I say to you, hello, oh I say, you say yes, what is it? See, you don't stop.
You don't hesitate. You don't think what mystif is up here. What could he be planning?
You just respond. And the response is in this case perfectly appropriate.
Now you could say, just have it. True, there is habit. And there are responses that are conditioned
fed into people. But we saw that that doesn't work for the comedian. He needs something more than
habit. And you often had the experience of finding yourself in a crisis.
Well, somehow managed to act intelligently, though there was no time to decide driving a car or something.
Suddenly your own being comes to your aid.
Well, that of course is the whole thing. But the basis of it is
to realize not that this is something sort of rather heroic, which one really ought to try to do.
As if there was some other possibility. As if it would be safer not to do that.
As if we could sit back here and say, oh, no, let's not get mixed up without adventure.
Let's be safe and rational and believe in original sin and mistrust ourselves.
If we do that, we are finished. We go straight by that method. With the kind of technology we have,
we go straight into the totalitarian state and all it goes with it. The total police state,
everything got to be controlled. Someone is going to win at the god game. And they end
of that, of course, as everybody knows, is every great totalitarian state destroys itself.
Because it becomes too rigid. And it consumes itself with its own fury and frustration.
It has to take itself its hostility out upon itself.
So, actually, it isn't a question that this is something that we really ought to do
or that to have faith in oneself is something virtuous or something, you know, like psychologically
integrated and you hope you can be more psychologically integrated than the other people, you know.
It isn't like that at all. It's something that you really cannot avoid that you actually,
although one, you know, sort of doesn't believe it. You do do it all the time.
Only when it comes to your attention, then you think you should.
When it doesn't come to your attention, you are functioning intelligently without thinking.
When it does come to your attention, you say, I better not do that. It's like, you know,
we work for certain bosses. And you know, one thing you mustn't do, if you could possibly
get away with it, is never ask their advice. Go ahead and do your job. But if you take it to
sit there and say, should I do it this way or that? And suddenly everything is held up while they
think about it. And then they can't make up their minds. You're going to go that way and say,
now, don't ask. Just go ahead and do it. And it'll save the boss so much time and it'll
stop him worrying and prevent him from having else. So in the same way, there are certain kind of
people who want to know whether something's legal. And investors usually don't ask because there's
a saying in Zen, officially, not even a needle is permitted to pass, unofficially, a carriage
and six horses can get through. So if the law does not challenge, and asked to make a decision on this,
forget it. You can probably get away with it. So in the same way, then, if you realize
that a trusting in your own organic skill and intelligence is something you can't really avoid,
you can try to avoid it and get mixed up. You get so mixed up that if you cannot, if you say,
if you think that's if you think you can't trust yourself, then it follows that that idea itself
is untrustworthy because it's one of your ideas. If you think you can't trust your brain,
how can you trust the logic which your brain makes possible? This logic is so simple,
and therefore so clumsy in dealing with the subtle complexity of our world and of the field of
forces in which we live. So you cannot let go, you know, say, now I'm going to let go, see.
Today, I'm going to let go. Don't do it that way. You remember that you can't hold on.
That's the only way to let go. You can't hold on. There's nothing to hold on.
No one to hold it. So all one is one system, one energy.
