Now, I hope you remember that this morning, I was trying in the brief space of 50 minutes
to give you a basic introduction to Mahayana Buddhism, the kind of Buddhism that is found
in China and Japan, and the kind of Buddhism of which Zen Buddhism in particular is a
subsect. And we are rather particularly concerned with Zen, since it has had such a fundamental
influence in the shaping of Japanese culture and the arts of Japan, and since we are in the
course of this informal tour, going to be visiting a good deal of Zen monasteries and seeing
a great deal of Zen formed works of art, architecture, and so on. So, I want to lead now tonight from
Buddhism in general or Mahayana Buddhism in general to Zen in particular. Now, the Zen plays a little
game with you. Whenever anybody like myself or Dr. Suzuki talks about Zen, all the other people say
because they talk about it, they don't understand it. Those in the words of Lao Tsur who know
do not say, those who say do not know, and yet he said that. You wrote a book of several
80 chapters or so to explain the Tao and the Tao, it's power, and nobody could help themselves.
They've got to talk. Human beings are at a bunch of chatterboxes, and when we've got something in our
minds that we want to talk about, we talk. Now poetry, though, is the great language, because poetry
is the art of saying what can't be said. Every poet knows this, they're trying to describe
the indescribable and every poet also knows that nothing is describable. Whether you take some sort
of ineffable mystical experience at one extreme or whether you take an ordinary rusty nail at the
other, nothing is really describable. In the words of the famous Count Kojibsky, whatever you say,
something is it isn't? We used to have a professor at Northwestern who would produce a match
booklet in front of his class and would say to them, what is it? And they would say match booklet.
He'd say, no, no, no, match booklet is a noise. Is this a noise? What is it? And so to answer
this, he'd throw it at them. That's what it is. So in this way, you see nothing can really be described
and yet on the other hand, we all know perfectly mean well what we mean when we talk. If you know,
if you share an experience with somebody else, then of course you can talk about it. We can all
talk about fire and air and water and wood because we know what it is. And there's no mystery.
So in the same way when it comes to discussing something so esoteric as Zen, it can be discussed.
Only Zen people play games with each other. They play little tricks, they test each other out
by saying to somebody, I remember when I met Paul Reps for the first time who wrote that lovely
book Zen flesh and Zen bones. And he said to me, well, he said, you written quite a number of books
by now, you must think you're pretty fancy. I said, I haven't said a word.
So this is simply his end game and people sort of feel each other out. There's a poem which says,
when two Zen masters meet each other on the road, they need no introduction, thieves recognize
one another instantaneously. So now, having got that off my chest, it's to say then, if I were to
give you a really proper and it really and truly educative talk about Zen, I would gather you around
here and sit here in silence for five minutes and leave. And in a way, this would be a much more
direct exposition of it than what I'm going to do instead, which we talk about it.
Only I have a feeling that you would feel that you were disappointed and somewhat cheated
by this kind of behavior, if I just left in five minutes silence. So then, this word Zen
is Japanese way of pronouncing the Chinese word chan, which in turn is the Chinese way of pronouncing
the Sanskrit word jhana and jhana is a very difficult word to translate into English if not
impossible. It's been called meditation, meditation in English generally means sitting quietly
and thinking about something and that's not what Zen is. Contemplation might come a little
nearer, if you use the word in a very technical sense, the sense that it was used or it still
is used among Catholic mystics, perhaps that's something a bit like Zen, but again contemplation
as we normally use the word has a sense of inactivity, a sense of not doing anything of being
completely still and passive, whereas Zen is something highly acted. So we really don't have
an English word for jhana, chan Zen. But I would say that we do know what it is
because we do all sorts of things every day of our lives in the spirit. When, for example,
you drive a car. Most Americans at any rate drive cars since they were teenagers and are very
expert drivers. And when they drive a car, they don't think about it. They're one with the car.
Or when a rider of a horse is one being with the horse when you watch a good cowboy or
a cavalry rider, he's glued to the horse. He's like a center, almost, as the horse moves, he moves,
which is in control. He's the horse riding the man or the man riding the horse. You practically
don't know. Same way when you have an excellent dancing partner who leads, who follows,
it seems as if you are one body and you move together. That is Zen, that is jhana.
And so in a wider sense, when a person doesn't react to life on the one hand or try to dominate
it on the other. But when the internal world of one zone organism and the external world of other
people and other things, move together as if they were and indeed are one and the same motion,
that is Zen. So you could say in a very, very simple way that the real concern of Zen is to
realize, not merely to think, but to know in your bones, that the inside world inside your skin
and the outside world outside your skin, going out as far as anything can go into
galaxies beyond galaxies, is all one world and all one being, one self and you're it.
And once you know that, then you have completely abolished all the problems that arise
as a result of feeling that you are a stranger in the world, that you are set down in the middle
of a hostile and alien domain of nature or people who are not you, this whole sense of
estrangement, foreignness to the world is overcome in Zen. Now let me illustrate this a little
before we go into Zen in any kind of technical way, by a few rather superficial but nevertheless
significant facts out of Japanese culture and the place of Zen in Japanese culture.
Japanese culture is as you may have noticed or was as you may have noticed, extraordinarily
ritualistic. There is a right way of doing everything, a good form, a proper style and nowhere
is this more apparent than in such practices as the T ceremony or arranging flowers or knowing
how to dress or knowing how to organize a formal dinner, the punct seriousness, the skill of these
people in doing these things is quite remarkable. But in the same measure, as they are very skillful
at doing these things, they are very worried about it. The whole question for example of bringing
presence to somebody else, have they given us more than we have given them? Did we remember this
occasion? Did we remember that occasion? These weigh very heavily on the Japanese soul. The debt
which you owe to your parents, the debt which you owe to your country and to your emperor,
immeasurable infinite debt never can be paid, all these weigh very heavily. And therefore in Japan
until the sort of breakaway of modern youth with its westernised ideals,
this is a very nervous culture. Concerned about whether one is playing the ritual
corrective. A culture like that needs an outlet, needs a safety valve, needs a way out of this thing
and then provides just that. And so by contrast, when you meet a Japanese who is thoroughly trained
in Zen, he is a different kind of personality all together for modern Japanese. He is in manners,
not studied Li Kertius, nor is he Brucec, but he is simply at ease. He gives you his whole attention,
so long as you give him your whole attention. If you start wandering and frittering, he's got
work to do and he prompt your leaves. But so long as you are wanting to talk to him,
he is there for you and for nobody else. And he sits down and he really sits.
You know, he doesn't worry about whether he ought to be somewhere else. And so unable to sit
with complete serenity in one place. You know if you have half an idea that you ought to be
worrying about something out in the garden, or that you ought to be cooking dinner, or you ought
to be down in your office or something, you can't sit where you are. You're not really there,
you're a kind of gas balloon that keeps wanting to wander off. But these people, when you see,
as you meet people connected with Zen, even they sometimes they most neophyte novice of a priest
is as this atmosphere of knowing how to live in the present and not to be fidgety and giggly and worrying about whether he's done the right thing.
So that's very much Zen style. Even though at the same time, the Zen people do have a very
exacting and demanding discipline. The function of this discipline is rather curious.
It's to enable you to be comfortable. It's in a to enable you, for example, to sleep on a concrete
sidewalk on a cold wet night and enjoy it, to relax completely under any situation of hardship.
You see, ordinarily, when you sit on a, you're out in the cold, you start shivering. Why?
Because you're resisting the cold. You're tightening your muscles against the cold and you get the
staggers. But you are taught, if you learn Zen discipline, not to do that. Take it easy, go with the
cold, relax, and all those monks in those monasteries here, there's cold of hell in winter,
and they simply sit there most of the time and there we would be frozen to death and miserable
and have our influenza and the great Siberian it, but they simply relax and learn how to take the
cold. So there's nothing about Zen discipline which is massacistic. It isn't to beat your body
because your body is bad and there's a creation of the devil or something. It has nothing to do with
that. It is how to be comfortable under all circumstances. But that again is something rather
incidental to the main question of Zen. As I said, these Zen people, as you meet them and as
you get to know their style of personality, are at ease in a culture that is not at ease.
In a culture that is chronically concerned with protocol and is it just right that is indeed a
terribly self-conscious culture. Where everybody is always watching themselves
and having therefore second thoughts about everything. And so the discipline of Zen is to enable
you to act without watching yourself. We would say unself-consciously. But Japanese are as terrified
of this as we are. They think, and we think. If I don't watch myself, I'll make a mistake.
If I don't hold a club over myself, I'll cease to be civilized and become a barbarian.
If I don't discipline myself with all sorts of down on that as passions of yours,
you will become like the monk of Siberia who buster himself and devoured the father's superior.
So this is basic mistrust and so on in one's own spontaneity.
Makes it, makes us wonder that if these Zen people are really spontaneous and they don't plan
and premeditate and hold clubs over themselves, will they become very, very dangerous people socially?
Well, they go out and rape their mothers and daughters and murder their grandmothers to inherit
their fortunes and so on and so forth. And Zen people just don't do that. And yet they are perfectly
spontaneous. So then let me try then and indicate how this discipline
calls in actually works. This will involve a little bit of letting the cat out of the bag,
but can't be helped. Let's go back to what I told you was fundamental to Buddhism.
Buddhism is unlike other religions in that it does not tell you anything.
It doesn't require you to believe in anything. Buddhism is a dialogue and what I call the teachings
of Buddhism are nothing more than the opening phrases or opening exchanges in the dialogue.
Buddhism is a dialogue between a Buddha and an ordinary man or rather someone who insists on defining
himself as an ordinary man and thereby creates a problem. I quoted you this morning,
I was saying that anybody who goes to a psychiatrist ought to have his head examined.
And in exactly the same way, in this country, anybody who goes to a guru, a spiritual teacher,
or a Zen master, or whatever, ought to have his head examined.
Or as the old Chinese master, Tokuzan put it, if you ask any question, you get 30 blows
with my stick. If you don't ask any question, you get 30 blows just the same.
In other words, what that? Hell, are you doing around here? Defining yourself as a student
and defining me as a teacher. In other words, you have to raise the problem.
And in the way of training of Zen, this is very clearly emphasized. If you go to a Zen teacher,
in you approach him in the traditional way, the first thing he will do is to say,
I have nothing to teach. Go away. What are these people doing around here? Aren't they your students?
You say, well, they're working with me, but unfortunately, we are very poor these days.
We don't have enough rice really to go around and make ends meet. And we can't take on anybody
else in this community. So you have to insist to be taken in. Every postulent for Zen training
assumes immediately that the teacher has given him the brush off in order to test his sincerity.
In other words, if you really want this thing, you've got to work for it.
That isn't the real point. The point is that you've got to make such a fuss to get in
that you cannot withdraw gracefully after having made such a fuss to get in.
Because you put yourself on this spot and you define yourself as somebody needing help,
or somebody with a problem who needs a master in order to be helped out of the problem.
So then when you've done this in the old days, of course, and it's still the formal rule among the Zen
monasteries here, that when you're a postulent and you want to come in, you have to sit outside at the gate
for a week or maybe only five days. In a position of supplication with your head on the
bow down on the steps and they let you in at night because they must give our hospitality to any
wandering monk, but you're expect not to go to sleep any of those five nights, but to sit there in
meditation and they give you food. But are you sit and you sit and you sit there and you make a damn
fool of yourself saying, I insist on getting into this thing. I insist on learning, I want to know
what the secret of this master here is, and he's told you from the start that he doesn't have
a secret and that he doesn't teach anything, but you insist that he does. So that is the
situation of everybody who feels that life is a problem to be solved. Whether you want psychoanalysis,
whether you want integration, whether you want salvation, whether you want butterfoot,
whatever it is, you define yourself as wanting. You created the problem.
What is the real problem that everybody brings to these teachers?
What is it all about? It's basically this isn't it? Teacher, I want to get one up on the universe.
I feel a stranger in this world. I feel that it's a problem in that
but having a body means that I am subject to disease and change and death. Having emotions and
passions means that I am tormented by feelings which I can't help having and yet it's not reasonable
to act on those feelings without creating trouble. I feel trapped by this world and so I want
to get the better of it and is there some wise man around who is a master of life and who can
teach me to cope with always. So that's what everybody is looking for in a teacher,
the man who is the savior and who can show you how to cope with it. The Zen teacher says,
I don't have any answers. Nobody believes that because he seems to be so confident
when you look at him. You can't believe that he has no answers and yet that's the consistent
teaching of Zen that it has nothing to say and nothing to teach. A great Chinese master of the
tongue dynasty called Linji and Chinese or Rinsai and Japanese said Zen is like
using a yellow leaf to stop a child crying. A child is crying for gold and the father takes
an autumn leaf that's yellow and says go. Or he said it's like using an empty fist to deceive a child.
See, you've got a closed fist and you say to the child, how do I got here?
And the child says, let me see, oh no, which is the fist behind your back. And the child
becomes more and more excited to know what the devil is in that fist and fights and fights and
finally is practically in tears and then suddenly you finally open the fist and there's nothing inside.
So in exactly the same way, the person who is under the impression that there is something
that we ought to get. See, all this is dressed up in a big way to be a Buddha to know the answer
to finally solve the problem, to get the message, to get the word or whatever you put it.
In other words, to be in control of your fate and of the world, would you like it?
If you could have it? And so all these powers are projected upon the Zen Master.
He is a Buddha. He is a Master of Life. And if he is, the reason why he is is that he has discovered
the unreality of the whole problem. And so all these powers are projected upon the Zen Master.
He is a Buddha. He is a Master of Life. And if he is, the reason why he is
is that he has discovered the unreality of the whole problem.
There is not life on the one hand and you on the other. It's all the same.
But you see, you can't tell people that. And just by telling, get them to see it.
Justing in exactly this way, you people who know that the earth is flat,
can't be reasoned with. People who believe that the Bible is the literal word of God,
absolutely impossible to reason with them at all, because they know it is so.
So in the same way, we tend to know that we are all separate, poor little mean,
and that we are in need of salvation or something. And we know this is so. And so somebody says,
well, you are not really that. You know that that feeling of separateness is an illusion.
Well, that's all very nice and theory, but I don't feel it.
So what will you do? What will you do with the person who is convinced that the earth is flat?
No way of reasoning with him. If it's for some reason important that he discovered that the earth is
round, you've got to play a game with him. You've got to play a trick on him. You tell him,
great, the earth is flat. Let's go and look over the edge. Wouldn't that be fun?
Of course, if we're going to look over the edge of the earth, we must be very, very careful
that we don't go around in circles or we'll never get to the edge.
So we've got to go along consistently, along a certain line of latitude, westwards.
And then we're going to come to the edge of the earth just so long as we're consistent.
In other words, in order to convince a flat earthist that the world is round,
you've got to make him act consistently on his own proposition and go consistently, westwards,
to find the edge of the world. Now, it last, when he, by going consistently, westwards,
he comes back to the place where he started. He's been convinced that the earth is at least cylindrical.
And he may believe you, then take it on faith that if he goes along a line of longitude,
the same thing will happen. But you see what you did was to make him persist in his fallet.
Now, that's the whole method of Zen, to make people become perfect egotistic and so explode the illusion of the separate ego.
So what happens? In effect, then, in the discipline of Zen, when you finally convince the master
that you are stupid enough to be accepted as a student, because you've persisted and because you've
defined yourself as someone having a problem. He has warned you well in advance that he has nothing
to teach. But he says, now I will ask you a question. In many ways of asking this question,
but they all boil down to one common theme. And that is who are you? You say you have a problem.
You say you would like to get out of the sufferings of life. You say you'd like to get one up on the
universe. I want to know who's asking this question. Show me you, and only they put it in such
ways as before your father and mother conceived you. What was your original nature?
Questions like that. And they'll say, now, look, I want to be shown. I don't want a lot of
ideas about who you are. I don't want to know who you are in terms of a social role.
You know, that you have such degrees or you have such professional qualifications and such
name and such a family. All that's the past. I want to see you genuinely now.
It's like saying to a person. Now, don't be self-conscious. See, I want you right this minute to be
completely sincere. Come on now. Well, nothing is better calculated to make a person
incapable of sincerity. Says when relatives come and aunts and uncles and there's a little child
and they want to review this child and see it and the parents say to the child,
darling, come on now and play for us. See, and the poor child is completely non-plastic.
Doesn't know what to do because you cannot play on demand.
Now, what is the Zen teacher doing in saying to a person? You must answer this question.
By coming before me, in fact, a rather formal situation, the kind of context in which Zen
master interviews his students is very formal and there he sits a sort of enthroned tiger.
He's definitely in this culture, a sense, a authority figure and so he's the last kind of person
you can be spontaneous with. Because you feel that he knows him through and through
and that, you know, ever read that story of one classed daughter man who has a fight with a bear,
the bear is a mind reader and always knows what move he's going to make.
So that the man can never conquer the bear unless he makes a move which he doesn't think about first.
How will you do that? And then you get the same feeling with relationship to a Zen master.
You feel that he is absolutely aware of everything phony about you,
that he reads you like a book, but that you can't find a way of being not phony.
Think about this a little. You see, we can arrange a group session and this is a little game that's being played
by lots of people, it's a kind of psychotherapy. We can arrange a group session in which the gimmick is this.
That when anybody says anything or does anything, the group or some section of the group challenges
its sincerity and says, why are you coming on so strong? Are you trying to dominate us?
And you see anything that you do can be interpreted in that way.
Because the moment a group of people becomes starts making comments on its own behavior,
it is setting up a situation within the group which is anonymous. Say in a TV studio
to turn in the camera on the monitor.
So when we start thinking about thinking, being aware of being aware, this is what is called in
the Japanese, the observing self. I watch myself all the time. See, you're in hopeless mess.
But this is the price that human beings pay for having become self-conscious, anxiety and guilt.
Anxiety because am I sure that I thought this out sufficient to carefully?
When I left the house, did I turn off the gas stove?
And incidentally, I remember turning it off but can I trust my memory?
I don't want to think about memory now and I wonder if I can trust it. Maybe I better go back and
look. I went back and I looked. But did I really see? I'm thinking about my site and whether
this is quite authentic. Did I look properly because you know how the unconscious can
audio senses? And so I better go and look again. See, it's soon now I've got into a sort of
vicious circle where I'll never get away from the house. And this you all this sort of getting mixed up,
is the penalty we pay for the advantageous gift of being able to know that we know.
It was a young man who said, though, it seems that I know that I know what I would like to see is the
eye that knows me when I know that I know that I know. And so this is the Zen trick. It's to put you into
this situation in a very crucial way to think about thinking about thinking about or just the same thing
to make a very strong effort not to think. That's Zazem. Sit, let your senses operate and be responsive
to whatever the may be around but don't think about it. But now this is already thinking. I'm thinking
about not thinking. How will I stop thinking about not thinking? So there you are. See, you're all
caught up. It's like somebody came to you and they put time one hand or molasses feathers in the other,
slap the two hands together and rub the morons and now pick off the feathers.
So you see what happens. The teacher is well aware that he's played this trick on you
and he's going to see what will happen if you act and he's going to help you to act consistently
on this foolishness. Now you see what he's done is he simply made a special case of what
society does to us all anyhow. And this is true of most cultures, the high cultures of the world,
whether they're of the east or whether they're of the west. Play a game on every new member.
They don't know their playing this game because therefore fathers played it on them
and they're still its hopeless victims. The game is called the double bind.
And the formula under which under whose auspices everybody comes into this world is as follows.
You are required to do something which will be acceptable only if you do it voluntarily.
You must love me. You must go to sleep. You must be natural.
You must be free. Listen to that. You must be free.
Now what happens you see? Society the community into which every child enters
defines the child. We know who we are as other people react to us. So the other people say to us
you're an independent agent. You're a responsibility. You are a freely acting individual.
But this is a commandment. And we obey it because we can't help it.
Child has no way of criticizing us or of seeing something phony about.
So the child has to be free because he is commanded to be so by the community.
Now then the community sets itself a problem. Having defined the child as an independent agent
and having got the child to believe that he's an independent agent because he isn't.
In other words he wouldn't believe this if he were independent.
It then has trouble getting him to behave as the community wants him to behave.
So they feel that there's something ordinary about all children. They're born in a original sin.
They're their refractors and so on. Of course they are because they've been defined in a self-contradictory way.
So when the community says to a person you must be free or when we are in a family relationship
in which the members of the family are saying to each other you must love me. It's your duty to love me.
What a bunch of rot. Supposing your one day you get up and you say to your wife. Darling,
do you really love me? And she replies, well I'm trying my very best to do so.
Is that the answer you wanted?
No. You wanted her to say, Darling, I can't help loving you. I love you so much. I could eat you.
You don't want to try to love you. Yet that is what you put on people.
In almost any marriage ceremony that you shall love this person,
thou shalt love the Lord thy God, thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
This is a double bind. And anybody who lives under the dominance of a double bind
lives in a state of chronic frustration. Because he is devoting his whole life to solving
a meaningless, non-sensical problem. Let's take the double bind that is the deepest of all.
You must go on living. Now living is a spontaneous process.
And to say to it, you must happen. Is exactly the same thing as saying
to any kind of creative artist. You must come through with good.
Tonight you must give the superb performance, and above all you must be on self-consciousness.
Well, this is being down to us all the time. And the object of the Zen discipline
is that instead of doing this to people unconsciously, as parents do it and as teachers do it
to children, and as the children's peers do it to their own, peer members. In Zen, the double bind
is put on you deliberately, knowing how stupid it is. The teacher is well aware of everything
he's doing and what tricks he's playing on you. Because he has behind it all the compassionate
intent of getting you into such a fierce double bind that you will see how stupid it is.
So then, what happens is this? He gives you the double bind, be genuine.
I want to see you do something that is the real you. I had a friend who was studying Zen
and he was given some co-on like this to work on. When he was one day going for his interview,
he walked through the garden that connected the soda or the monk's study quarters with the master's
place and there was a big bull frog. Bull frogs in this country are the tame people don't eat them.
So he swept up the bull frog and dropped it into the sleeve of his kimono. When he got in front
of the teacher to answer the co-on, he asked us to say to do spontaneously, produce his genuine self,
he produced the bull frog. The teacher looked at it and shook his head and said,
two intellectuals. First we might say, two contrived, two studied.
That's not yet you. How do you see the bind in this? It's like being told that everything is
all right at this moment so long as you don't think of a green elephant.
So try not to think of a green elephant. See? Now as he works at this, as he tries to produce
the genuine you, the teacher really brings him out on this and makes him work and work over a period
of many months. Until he comes to the point of seeing this, there is nothing you can do to be
genuine. The more you do, the funer you are, but at the opposite extreme, there is nothing you
can not do. How does to say you cannot give up trying to be genuine? You can't relax, you know,
and be completely passive. And say, well, let's forget about it. Let's think about practical matters
and forget all these spiritual concerns. The moment you do that, your abandonment of trying is
itself an insidious form of trying. For example, there's a very interesting Hindu teacher
about the name of Krishna Murty, that many of you may know about, and he tells people, you know,
that all their religious enquiry, their yoga practices, their reading, religious books and so on,
is nothing but a form of perpetuating one's ego's centricity, but on a very refined and high
brow level. So he gets a kind of disciple who studiously avoids reading any kind, the
philosophical or edifying book, they are reduced to reading mystery stories, and they become devoted,
non-disciples. See, what a clever bind that is. It's the same as the Zen technique.
You can't, in other words, let go of, we've seen, you see, my point was at the beginning,
we saw that the way of Buddhism is to let go of yourself, to see that you live in a universe,
which in which nothing can be grasped. Therefore, stop grasping. So here's the problem.
I come and say to the teacher, teach me not to grasp, you say, why do you want to know?
And he, it shows you that the reason why you want to stop grasping is that it's a new form of
grasping. You feel that you will beat the game by being unattached. See, it's horrible to
grieve when somebody who loved dies. So maybe by being unattached to that person, I can avoid grief,
but it cold, isn't it? Maybe you see by not having an ego. When life comes and bangs on me,
if there's nobody there, it'll be all right. So that's why I want non-ego state.
That's phony. All this is a new way of safeguarding and protecting the ego.
So this is the way in which Buddhism is a dialogue. So you see, if you go back to fundamental, primitive
Buddhism, people say to the Buddha, I want to escape from suffering, perfectly on its statement.
All right. Realize that suffering is caused by desire. Try not to desire.
So the student goes away and tries to eliminate desires by controlling his mind and practicing yoga.
Comes back to the teacher and says, it's pretty difficult, but I have managed at least to get rid of
some desires. Teacher says to him, but you're still desiring to get rid of desire.
What about that one? And then the student sees, but if he striasts a stop desiring to get rid of desire.
But then he's got to stop desiring to get rid of not desiring to desire.
And suddenly he finds himself once more with molasses in one hand and feathers in the other.
Absolutely tied up in a vicious circle.
So he realizes there is nothing I can do about it and there's nothing I can not do about it.
And this predicament in Zen is called, in mosquito trying to bite an iron bull.
A position of such psychic extremity that nothing can be done about it.
Now the point here is, what does this situation mean?
When you find yourself in that kind of a trap, what's the meaning of the trap?
Why that's very simple. If there's nothing you can do
and also nothing you cannot do about a given situation, it means that you are funny.
And in other words what we call a separate ego, isn't there?
Of course it can't do anything because it is not an agent.
And by virtue of the fact that it can't do anything equally, it can't not do anything.
It's completely funny. So what has happened is to expose
the fiction of their being a separate ego, either to force its actions upon the world or to have
the actions of the world, force upon it as a puppet. This thing just doesn't exist.
Except as a figment of the imagination.
Or except as a game rule, let's pretend everybody is responsible.
Is independent, is separate. Sure that's a great game, but it's a game.
And so the whole object of this Zen dialogue between the teacher and the student
is to carry that game of being the separate ego, to its logical conclusion, to its reduction
at absurdum. So that as Blake said, the fool who persists in his folly will become wise.
