I wonder what you mean when you use the word I, I've been very interested in this problem
for a long, long time.
And I've come to the conclusion that what most civilized people mean by that word is a hallucination.
That is to say a false sense of personal identity.
That is at complete variance with the facts of nature.
And as a result of having a false sense of identity, we act in a way that is inappropriate to
our natural environment.
And when that inappropriate way of action is magnified by a very powerful technology, we
swiftly begin to see the results of a profound discord between man and nature.
As is well known, we are now in the process of destroying our environment.
As a result of an attempt to conquer it and master it.
And we have not realized therefore that our environment is not something other than ourselves.
In assuming that it is, we have made a great mistake and are now paying the price for it.
But most people would agree with the lines of the poet who said, I, a stranger and
afraid in a world I never made.
Because we have the strong sensation that our own being inside our skin is extremely different
from the world outside our skin.
That while there may be intelligence inside human skins and while there may be values and
loving feelings, outside the skin is a world of mechanical process which does not give
a damn about any individual and which is basically unintelligent, being jarrations of blind
force and so far as the merely biological world is concerned jarrations of libido which
is Freud's word for blind lust.
It should be obvious that the human being goes with the rest of the universe.
Even though we say in popular speech, I came into this world.
Now it is not true that you came into this world.
You came out of it.
In the same way as a flower comes out of a plant or a fruit comes out of a tree.
And as an apple tree apples, the solar system in which we live and therefore the galaxy
in which we live and therefore the system of galaxies in which we live, that system
peoples.
Therefore people are an expression of its energy and of its nature.
If people are intelligent and I suppose we have to grant that if, then the energy which
people express must also be intelligent because one does not gather figs from fissiles
and grapes from thorns.
And it does not occur, you see, to the ordinary civilized person, to regard himself or herself
as an expression of the whole universe.
It should be obvious that we cannot exist except in an environment of earth, air, water
and solar temperature, that all these things go with us and are as important to us
albeit outside our skins as our internal organs, heart, stomach, brain and so forth.
Now if then we cannot describe the behavior of organisms without at the same time describing
the behavior of their environments, we should realize that we have a new entity of description.
Not the individual organism alone, but what would now be called a field of behavior,
which we must call rather clumsily the organism environment.
You go with your environment in the same way as your head goes with the rest of your body.
You do not find in nature faces arriving in the world, sewage generous.
They go with a body, but also bodies do not arrive in a world which would be, for example,
a plain bore of scrubbed rock floating without an atmosphere far away from a star.
That will not grow bodies.
There is no soil for bodies.
There is no complexity of environment which is body producing.
So bodies go with a very complicated natural environment and if the head goes with the body
and the body goes with the environment, the body is as much an integral part of the environment
as the head is part of the body.
It is deceptive, of course, because the human being is not rooted to the ground like a tree.
A human being moves about and therefore can shift from one environment to another.
But these shifts are superficial.
The basic environment of the planet remains a constant.
And if the human being leaves the planet, he has to take with him, and a canned version
of the planetary environment.
Now, we are not really aware of this.
Upon taking thought and do consideration, it does occur to us, yes, indeed.
We do need that environment.
But in the ordinary way, we don't feel it.
That is to say we don't have a vivid sensation of belonging to our environment
in the same way that we have a vivid sensation of being an ego inside a bag of skin,
located mostly in the skull, about half way between the ears and a little way behind the eyes.
And it issues in these disastrous results of the ego,
which, according to 19th century common sense, feels that it is a fluke in nature.
And that if it does not fight nature, it will not be able to maintain its status as intelligent fluke.
So the geneticists are now saying, and many others are now saying,
that man must take the course of his evolution into his own hands.
He can no longer trust the wiggly random and unintelligible processes of nature
to develop him any further, but he must interfere with his own intelligence.
And through genetic alterations, breed the kind of people who will be viable for human society.
And that sort of thing.
Now this I submit is a ghastly error, because human intelligence has a very serious limitation.
That limitation is that it is a scanning system of conscious attention,
which is linear.
That is to say, it examines the world in lines.
However, as you would pass the beam of a flashlight across a room or a spotlight,
that's why our education takes so long.
It takes so long because we have to scan miles of lines of print.
And we regard that, you see, as basic information.
Now the universe does not come at us in lines.
It comes at us in a multidimensional continuum in which everything is happening altogether
everywhere at once.
And it comes at us much too quickly to be translated into lines of print or of other information
however fast they may be scanned.
And that is our limitation so far as the intellectual life and the scientific life is concerned.
The computer will greatly speed up linear scanning, but it's still linear scanning.
And so long as we are stuck with that form of wisdom, we cannot deal with more than a few variables at once.
Now what do I mean by that?
What is a variable?
A variable is any one linear process.
Let's take music.
When you play a Bach fugue and there are four parts to it, you have four variables.
You have four moving lines and you can take care of that with two hands.
An organism using two feet can put in two more variables and have six going.
And you will may realize if you've ever tried to play the organ that it's quite difficult
to make six independent motions go at once.
The average person cannot do that without training.
The average person cannot deal with more than three variables at once without using a pencil.
Now when we study physics, we are dealing with processes in which there are millions of variables.
This however we handle by statistics.
In the same way as insurance companies use actuarial tables to predict when most people will die.
If the average age of death is 65, however this prediction does not apply to any given individual.
Any given individual will live to plus or minus 65 years.
And the range of difference may be very wide indeed, of course.
But this is all right.
The 65 guess is all right when you're doing large-scale gambling.
And that's the way the physicist works in predicting the behavior of nuclear waveycles.
But the practical problems of human life deal with variables in the hundreds of thousands.
Here's statistical methods are very poor and thinking it out by linear consideration is impossible.
With that equipment then we are proposing to interfere with our genes.
And with that equipment also be it said we are trying to solve our political, economic and social problems.
And naturally everybody has the sense of total frustration.
And the individual feels what an earth can I do?
We do not seem to know a way of calling upon our brains.
Because our brains can handle an enormous number of variables that are not accessible to the process of conscious attention.
Your brain is now handling your total nervous system to be more accurate.
Your blood chemistry, the secretions from your glands, the behavior of millions of cells.
It is doing all that without thinking about it.
That is to say without translating the processes it is handling into consciously reviewed words, symbols or numbers.
Now when I use the word thinking I mean precisely that process.
Translating what is going on in nature into words, symbols or numbers because both words and numbers are kinds of symbols.
Symbols bear the same relation to the real world that money bears to wealth.
You cannot quench anybody's thirst with the word water just as you cannot eat a dollar bill and derive nutrition from it.
But using symbols and using conscious intelligence, scanning, has proved very useful to us.
It has given us such technology as we have.
But at the same time it has proved too much of a good thing.
At the same time we've become so fascinated with it.
That we confuse the world as it is with the world as it is thought about, talked about and figured about.
That is to say with the world as it is described.
And the difference between these two is vast.
And when we are not aware of ourselves except in a symbolic way,
we are not related to ourselves at all.
We are like people eating menus instead of dinners.
And that's why we all feel psychologically frustrated.
So then we get back to the question of what do we mean by eye?
Well, first of all, obviously, we mean our symbol of ourselves.
Now ourselves, in this case, is the whole psychophysical organism, conscious and unconscious,
plus it's environment.
That's your real self.
Your real self, in other words, is the universe as centered on your organism.
That's you.
You say, let me just clarify that a little for one reason.
What you do is also a doing of your environment.
Your behavior is its behavior as much as its behavior is your behavior.
It's mutual.
We could say it is transactional.
You are not a puppet which your environment pushes around.
Nor is the environment a puppet which you push around.
They go together.
They act together.
In the same way, for example, if I have a wheel,
one side of it going down is the same as the other side of it going up.
When you handle the steering wheel of a car, are you pulling it or are you pushing it?
No, you're doing both, aren't you?
When you pull it down this side, you are pushing it up that side.
It's all one.
So there's a push pull between organism and environment.
We are only aware of this as when in curious alterations of consciousness,
which we call mystical experience, cosmic consciousness,
an individual gets the feeling that everything that is happening is his own doing,
or the opposite of that feeling, that he isn't doing anything,
but that all his doings, his decisions and so forth are happening of nature.
You can feel it either way.
You can describe it in these two completely opposite ways,
but you're talking about the same experience.
You're talking about experiencing your own activity
and the activity of nature as one single process.
And you can describe it as if you were omnipotent, like God,
or as if it were completely deterministic and you hardly existed at all.
But remember, both points of view are right.
And we'll see where that gets us.
But we don't feel that, do we ordinarily?
What we feel instead is an identification of ourselves
with our idea of ourselves, or I would rather say with our image of ourselves.
And that's the person or the ego.
You play a role.
You identify with that role.
I play a role.
It's called Alan Watts.
And I know very well that that's a big act.
I can play some other roles besides Alan Watts, if necessary.
But I find this one is better for making a living.
But I assure you, it's a mask, and I don't take it seriously.
You know, the idea of my being a kind of Messiah or guru or savior of the world
just breaks me up, as I know me.
So it's very difficult to be holy in the ordinary sense.
So I know I'm not that.
But most of us are taught to think that we are whom we are called.
And when you're a little child and you begin to learn a role
and your parents and your peers approve of your being that,
they know who you are, you're predictable.
So you can be controlled.
But when you act out of role and you imitate some other child's behavior,
everybody points the finger and says, you're not being true to yourself.
Johnny, that's not you, that's Peter.
And so you learn to stay Peter or to stay Johnny.
But of course, you're not either.
Because this is just the image of you.
It's as much of you as you can get into your conscious attention,
which is precious little.
Your image of yourself contains no information
about how you structure your nervous system.
It contains no information about your blood chemistry.
It contains almost no information about the subtle influences of society upon your behavior.
It does not include the basic assumptions of your culture,
which are all taken for granted and unconscious.
And you can't find them out unless you study other cultures
to see how their basic assumptions differ.
It includes all kinds of illusions that you're completely unaware of,
as for example that time is real.
And that there is such a thing as a past,
which is pure hope.
But nevertheless, all these things are unconscious in us.
And they are not included in our image of ourselves.
Nor, of course, included in our image of ourselves.
Is there any information about our inseparable relationships
with the whole natural universe?
So this is a very impoverished image.
When you ask a person, what did you do yesterday?
They'll give you a historical account of a certain number of events
in which they participated and a certain number of things,
which they saw used or were clobbered by.
But realize at once that this history leaves out most of what happened.
I, in trying to describe what happens to me this evening,
will never be able to describe it.
Because there are so many people here that if I were to talk about
everyone whom I've seen, what they were wearing,
what color their hair was, what sort of expressions they had on their faces,
I would have to talk to doomsday.
So instead of this rich physical experience,
which is very rich indeed, I have to attenuate it in memory and description
to saying, oh, I met a lot of people in Philadelphia.
And there were men in the women and lots of them were young and some of them were old.
You know, it's the most utterly impoverished account of what went on.
So therefore, in thinking of ourselves in this way,
what I did yesterday, what I did the day before,
in terms of this stringy, main G account,
all I have is a caricature of myself.
And you know the caricaturist doesn't draw you all in.
He just puts certain salient features whereby people will recognize you.
It's not a skeleton.
So we are as it were, conceiving ourselves as a bunch of skeletons.
And they got no flesh on them, just a bunch of bones.
And no wonder we all feel inadequate.
We're all looking for something to the future, to bring us a goody.
We know we ought to have, there's a golden goody at the end of the line somewhere.
There's a good time coming, be it ever so far away, that one far off divine event
to which all creation moves.
We hope.
And therefore, we say of something that's no good, it has no future.
I would say it has no present, but everybody says it has no future.
Now, here we are, as it were, psychically starved.
And always, therefore, looking for, looking, seeking, seeking, seeking.
And this confused, seeking is going on everywhere.
We don't know what we want.
Nobody knows what they want.
We say, yes, we think of what we want in vague terms, pleasure, money, wealth, love,
fulfillment, personal development.
But we don't know what we mean by all that.
For person really sits down to figure out, write a long essay, 20 pages,
on your idea of heaven.
It'll be a sorry production.
You can see it already in medieval art, whether it did pickations of heaven and hell.
Hell is always much better than heaven.
Although it's uncomfortable, it's a sadomasochistic orgy.
Wow, he, you know, hell is really roaring.
What else? All the saints in heaven, the sitting.
You know, the very, very smug and demure, like they were in church.
And you see also the multitudes of the saved.
Instead of this writhing, wormy thing, you can see all their heads,
which the artist has drawn to abbreviate them just the tops of their heads in masses.
They look like cobblestone street.
Flattened out.
So what has happened then is this?
That our eye is an illusion.
It's an image.
And it is no more our self than an idol is the Godhead.
But we say, it can't be so, because I feel I really exist.
I just didn't just an idea in my head. It's a feeling. I feel me.
Well, what is it that you feel when you feel eye?
Well, what is it that you feel when you feel eye?
I'll tell you.
What do you do when somebody says pay attention?
What is the difference between looking at something and taking a hard look at it?
Or between hearing something and listening intently? What's the difference?
What's the difference between waiting while something goes on and enduring it?
Why? The difference is this.
When you pay attention instead of just looking,
you screw up your face, you frown, and stare.
That is a muscular activity around here.
When you will, you grit your teeth or cleanse your fists.
When you endure or control yourself, you pull yourself together,
physically, and therefore you get uptight.
You hold your breath.
You do all kinds of muscular things to control the functioning of your nervous system.
And none of them have the slightest effect on the proper operation of the nervous system.
If you stare at things, you will rather fuzz the image than see them clearly.
If you listen intently by concentrating on muscles around the ears,
you will be so much attending to muscles here that you won't hear things properly.
And you may get singing in the ears.
If you tighten up with your body to pull yourself together,
all you do is constrict yourself.
I remember in school, I sat next to a boy who had great difficulty in learning to read.
And what they always say to children is, try!
If you can't do something, it must try. So, the boy tries and what he does,
when he's trying to get out words, he grunts and grunts as if he were lifting weights.
And the teachers impress, the boy is really trying, gives him beef, I effort.
Oh, he's doing!
There's nothing to do with it.
Now, we all make this muscular straining
with the thought that it's achieving psychological results.
The sort of psychological results, it's intended to achieve.
And all this amounts to is, it's like you're taking off an aget plane.
You've got to a mile down the runway and the thing isn't up near yet and you get nervous.
So, you start pulling a jacit bill.
That's what it is.
Now, that is a chronic feeling. We have it in us all the time and it corresponds to the word I.
That's what you feel when you say I.
You feel that chronic tension because when an organ is working properly, you don't feel it.
If you see your eye, you've got a cataract.
If you hear your ears, you've got singing in your ears, you know, getting in the way of hearing.
When you are fully functioning, you are unaware of the organ.
When you're thinking clearly, your brain isn't getting in your way.
Actually, of course, you are seeing your eyes in the sense that everything you see out in front of you
is a condition in the optic nerves at the back of the skull.
That's where you're aware of all this.
But you're not aware of the eye as the eye.
I'm talking about the optical eye.
So, when we are aware of the ego eye, we are aware of this chronic tension inside ourselves.
And that's not us. It's a futile tension.
So, when we get the illusion, the image of ourselves, married to a futile tension,
you've got an illusion, married to a futility.
And then you wonder, why I can't do anything.
Why I feel in the face of all the problems of the world, impotent.
And why I somehow cannot manage to transform eye.
Now, here we get to the real problem.
Because we're always telling each other that we should be different.
I'm not going to tell you that tonight.
Why not? Because I know you can't be.
Not can I.
That may sound depressing, but I'll show you it isn't. It's very heartening.
But everybody, you see, who is a tall sensitive and awake to their own problems and human problems?
It's trying to change himself.
We know we can't change the world unless we change ourselves.
If we are all individually selfish, we're going to be collectively selfish.
If we don't really love people, and only pretend to,
somehow we've got to find a way to love, after all it's said in the Bible,
that our shall-clove the Lord thy God, and your neighbor is yourself.
You must love.
Yeah, we all agree, sure, but we don't.
In fact, one psychologist, very smartly asked a patient with whom are you in love against?
And this is particularly becomes a polling when we enter into the realm of higher things.
By which I mean spiritual development, everybody these days is interested in spiritual development.
And why is labor cars we want to change our consciousness?
Many people are well aware that this ego-centric consciousness is a hallucination.
And that they presume it's the function of religion to change it.
Because that's what the Zen Buddhist and Yogis and all these people in the Oriental doing.
They are changing their state of consciousness to get something called Satori,
or mystical experience, or Nirvana, or Moksha, or what have you,
and everybody around here is really enthused about that, because
that you don't get that in church.
I mean, there have been Christian mystics about the church has been very quiet about them.
Then the average church, all you get is talk.
There's no meditation, no spiritual discipline.
They tell God what to do, and terminably, as if he didn't know.
And then they tell the people what to do, as if they could, or even wanted to.
And then they sing religious nursery rhymes.
And then to cap it all, the Roman Catholic Church,
which did at least have an unintelligible service.
Which is, you know, it was real mysterious and suggested vast magic going on.
They went and put the thing into bad English.
And they took away incense, and they took away, they became a bunch of Protestants,
and the thing was terrible.
So now all these Catholics are at loose ends.
There's clear booth loose, put it, and not to be upon, but she said, you know.
It's no longer possible to practice contemplative prayer at Mass.
Because you're being advised, exalted, edified, all the time.
And that becomes a bore, think of God, listening to all those prayers.
I mean, do have, I mean, talking about grieving the Holy Spirit,
it's just awful.
People have no consideration for God at all.
So, but in pursuing these spiritual disciplines, yoga and Zen and so forth,
and also psychotherapy, there comes up a big difficulty.
And the big difficulty is this.
I want to find a method whereby I can change my consciousness.
But they're for to improve myself.
But the self that needs to be improved is the one that is doing the improving.
And so I'm rather stuck.
I find out the reason that I think I believe say in God
is that I sure hope that somehow God will rescue me.
In other words, I want to hang on to my own existence.
And I feel rather shaky about doing that for myself, but I just hope there's a God who'll take care of it.
Or, if I could be loving, I would have a better opinion of myself.
I'd feel better about it.
I could face myself as people say.
If I were more loving, so the unloving me, somehow by some gimmickry,
has to turn itself into a loving meal.
This is just trying to lift yourself off the ground with your own bootstraps.
It can't be done.
And that's why religion in practice mainly produces hypocrisy.
And guilt.
Because of the constant failure of these enterprises.
Oh, people go and study Zen.
And they come back and say, wow, getting rid of your ego is a superhuman task.
I assure you it's going to be very, very difficult to get rid of your ego.
You're going to have to sit for a long time and you're going to get the sourest legs.
Hard work.
Now all you wretched kids do think you're getting rid of your ego on part or something or other.
Easy yoga.
You don't know what you're in for when it really comes down to the nitty gritty.
Well, you know, the biggest ego trip going is getting rid of your ego.
And the joke of it all is your ego doesn't exist.
It's nothing to get rid of.
It's an illusion as I tried to explain.
But you still want to ask how to stop the illusion.
Now who's asking?
I mean, do you think, in the ordinary sense in which you use the word I, how can I stop identifying myself or the wrong me?
Well, the answer is simply you can't.
Now the Christians put this in their way when they say that mystical experience is a gift of divine grace.
Man as such cannot achieve this experience.
It is a gift of God and if God doesn't give it to you, there's no way of getting it.
Now that is solidly true, you can't do anything about it because you don't exist.
Well, you say that's pretty depressing news.
But the whole point is it isn't depressing news.
It is the joyous news.
There's a Zen poem which puts it like this talking about it.
Me, it means the mystical experience, satory, the realization that you are the eternal energy of the universe, like Jesus did.
It says like this, you cannot catch hold of it.
Nor can you get rid of it.
In not being able to get it, you get it.
When you speak, it's silent. When you are silent, it speaks.
Now, in not being able to get it, you get it. Because this whole feeling, what Christianity is trying to explain to people, for example, when he says,
Why do you ask for a method? There is no method. All methods are simply
gimmicks for strengthening your ego.
So how do we not do that? This is you're still asking for a method.
There is no method. If you really understand what your eye is, you will see, there is no method.
We think this is so sad.
But it's not. This is the gospel, the good news.
Because if you cannot achieve it, if you cannot transform yourself,
that means that the main obstacle to mystical vision has collapsed. That was you.
What happens? You can't do anything about it.
Your church will wait then. What are you going to commit suicide?
But it's busy. You just put that offer a little while. Wait and see what happens.
You can't control your thoughts. You can't control your feelings. Because there is no controller.
You are your thoughts in your feelings. And they are running along, running along, running along. Just sit and watch them.
Here they go. You are still breathing on you.
Still growing your hair.
Still seeing and hearing. Are you doing that?
I mean, is breathing something that you do?
Do you see? I mean, do you organize the operations of your eyes?
And now exactly how to work those rods and cones in the retina. Do you do that?
It's a happening. It happens. So you can feel all this happening. Your breathing is happening.
Your thinking is happening. Your feeling is happening. Your hearing, your seeing. The clouds are
happening across the sky. The sky is happening blue. The sun is happening shining.
There it is. All this happening. And may I introduce you? This is yourself.
This begins to be a vision of who you really are. And that's the way you function.
You function by happening that is to say by spontaneous occurrence.
And this is not a state of affairs that you should realize.
I cannot possibly preach it to you because the minute you start thinking, I should understand that.
This is the stupid notion again of I should bring it about when there is no you to bring it about.
So that's why I'm not preaching. You can only preach to egos. All I can do is to talk about what is.
It amuses me to talk about what is because it's wonderful. I love it. And therefore I like to talk.
If I get paid for it, then I make my living. And sensible people get paid for doing what they enjoy doing.
So this is not, you see, this is the whole approach. It's not to convert you, not to make you
over, not to improve you. But if you discover, if you really knew the way you are,
things would be would be sane. But you see, you can't do that. You can't make that
discovery. Because you're in your own way. So long as you think, I'm I.
So long as that hallucination blocks it. And the hallucination disappears only in the realization of
its own futility. When at last you see, you can't do it. You cannot make yourself over. You cannot
really control your own mind. See, when we try to control the mind, a lot of yoga teachers try to get you to
control your own mind, mainly to prove to you that you can't do it. There's nothing, you know,
a fool who persists in his folly will become wise. So they what they do is they speed up the folly.
And so you get concentrating. And you can have a certain amount of superficial and initial success
by a process commonly called self-adnotes. And you can think you're making progress.
And a good teacher will let you go along that way for a while until he really throws you with one.
Why are you concentrating? See, Buddhism works this way. Buddha said, if you suffer, you suffer
because you desire. And your desire is either unattainable or always being disappointed or something.
So cut out desire. So those disciples went away and they stamped on desire, jumped on desire, cut
the throat of desire and threw out desire. But then they came back and Buddha said, but you are still
desiring not to desire. And they wanted how to get rid of that. So when you see that that's nonsense,
they are naturally comes over you, a quietness. In seeing that you cannot control your mind,
you realize there is no controller. What you took to be the thinker of thoughts is just one of the
thoughts. What you took to be the feeler of the feelings which was that chronic muscular strain
is just one of the feelings. What you took to be the experience of experience is just part of the
experience. So there isn't any thinker of thoughts, feeler of feelings. We get into that bind
because we have a grammatical rule that verbs have to have subjects. And the funny thing about that
is that verbs of processes and subjects and nouns which are supposed to be things. How does a noun
start a verb? How does the thing put a process into action? Obviously it can't. But we always insist
that there is this subject called the Noah and without a Noah that can't be knowing. But that's
just a grammatical rule. It isn't a rule of nature. In nature there's just knowing like you're feeling
and now to say you are feeling it. As if you were somehow different from the feeling. When I say
I am feeling, what I mean is there is feeling here. When I say you are feeling, I mean there is feeling
there. I have to say even there is feeling. What a cumbersome language we have. Chinese is easier.
You don't have to put all that in. I wouldn't say things twice as fast in Chinese as you can
in any other language. Well anyway, when you come to see that you can do nothing, that the
play of thought of feeling etc. just goes on by itself as a happening. Then you are in a state
which we will call meditation. And slowly without being pushed, your thoughts will come to silence.
That is to say all the verbal symbolic chatter going on in the skull. Don't try and get rid of it
because that will again produce the illusion that there's a controller. Just it goes on, it goes on,
finally it gets tired of itself and bored and stops. And so then there's a silence.
And this is a deeper level of meditation. And in that silence, you suddenly begin to see the world
as it is. And you don't see any past and you don't see any future. You don't see any difference
between yourself and the rest of it. That's just an idea. You can't put your hand on the
difference between myself and you. You can't blow it, you can't bounce it, you can't pull it.
It's just an idea. You can't find any material body because material body is an idea.
So it's spiritual body. Somebody's philosophical notions. See, reality isn't material.
That's an idea. Reality isn't spiritual. That's an idea. Reality is...
So we find, if I've got to put it back into words, that we live in an eternal now.
You've got all the time in the world because you've got all the time there is, which is now.
And you are this universe. And you feel the strange feeling when ideas don't define the
differences. You feel that other people's doings are your doings. And that makes it very
difficult to blame other people. If you're not sophisticated theologically, you may of course
run screaming in the streets and say that you're God. In a way that's what happened to Jesus because
he wasn't sophisticated theologically. He only had Old Testament biblical theology behind him.
If he had Hindu theology, he could have put it more subtly. But it was only that rather primitive
theology of the Old Testament. And that was a conception of God as a monarchical boss.
And you can't go around and say, I'm the boss's son.
If you're going to say, I'm God, you must allow it for everyone else too.
But this was a heretical idea from the point of view of Hebrew theology. And so what they did
with Jesus was they pedestalized him. That means kicked him upstairs so that he wouldn't be able
to influence anyone else. And only you may be God. And that stopped the gospel cold right at the
beginning. It couldn't spread. Well anyway, this is therefore to say that the transformation
of human consciousness through meditation is frustrated. So long as we think of it in terms of
something that I myself can bring about by some kind of wangled by some sort of gimmick.
Because you see that leads to endless games of spiritual one-upmanship. And of guru competitions.
Of my guru is more effective than your guru. My yoga is faster than your yoga.
I'm more aware of myself than you are. I'm humble than you are. I'm sorry for my sins than you are.
I love you more than you love me. It is interminable goings on about which people fight and wonder
whether they are little bit more evolved than somebody else and so on. All that can just fall away.
And then we get this strange feeling that we have never had, you see in our lives,
except occasionally by accident, some people get a glimpse. That we are no longer
this poor little stranger and afraid in a world it never made. But that you are this universe
and you are creating it at every moment because you see it starts now. It didn't begin in the past.
There was no past. See if the universe began in the past when that happened it was now. See
what it's still now and the universe is still beginning now and it's trailing off like the wake of
a ship from now and the wake of the ship fades out so does the past. You can look back there to explain
things but the explanation disappears. You'll never find it there. Things are not explained by the past.
They are explained by what happens now. That creates the past and it begins here.
That's the birth of responsibility because otherwise you can always look over your shoulder and say,
well I'm the way I am because my mother dropped me and she dropped me because she was
neurotic because her mother dropped her. And when we go back to Adam and Eve or
to a disappearing monkey or something and we never get at it. But in this way you
are faced with it. You're doing all this and that's an extraordinary shock.
So, cheer up. You can't blame anyone else for the kind of world you're in and if you know
you see that I, in the sense of the person, the front, the ego, it really doesn't exist.
Then it won't go to your head too badly if you wake up and discover that you're God.
