In 1925, Mahatma Gandhi broke the following words.
I find a solace in the Bhagavad Gita that I miss even in the sermon on the Mount.
When disappointment stares me in the face and all alone I see not one ray of light, I go
back to the Bhagavad Gita.
I find a verse here and a verse there and I immediately begin to smile in the midst of
overwhelming tragedies and my life has been full of external tragedies and if they have
left no visible, no indelible scar on me, I owe it all to the teachings of the Bhagavad
Gita.
In this passage that I've just quoted to you, Mahatma Gandhi was referring to what
is perhaps the most famous of all the spiritual classics of India.
The Bhagavad Gita, or Bhagavad the Lord, Gita song, the song of the Lord.
It is spelled V-H-A-G-A, V-A-D, Bhagavad Gita, G-I-T-A.
The song of the Lord, the Lord in this case, being Sri Krishna who in Hindu mythology
is regarded as an incarnation and embodiment in the Sanskrit language and avatar of Vishnu, the
Supreme Lord, the personification of the ultimate reality underlying this universe.
The Bhagavad Gita was probably compiled about the 5th century BCE and it forms a part of
a great epic called the Mahabharata.
It's attributed to a sage by the name of Yasa and contains a complete epitome of the whole
central doctrine of Hinduism known as the Vedanta.
It's very fascinating and to ask puzzling fact that Gandhi, preeminently the man of non-violence
in modern times, was so devoted to this book, because the scene with which the book opens
is a battlefield, the field of Kuru, where a young prince by the name of Arjuna is riding
in his chariot and Sri Krishna, the incarnation of Vishnu is his chariot here.
As the opposing armies face each other and the battle is about to begin, and Arjuna is
faint in heart, oppressed with the senselessness of this struggle and of intonessing warfare.
And the Gita says in the first chapter, he was overcome with great compassion and uttered
this in sadness.
When I see my own people arrayed in eager for fight, or Krishna my limbs quail, my mouth
goes dry, my body shakes and my hair stands on end, and I see evil omens or Krishna, nor do
I foresee any good by slaying my own people in the fight.
I do not long for victory or Krishna, nor kingdom nor pleasures, of what uses kingdom to us
so Krishna, or enjoyment, or even life.
And having spoken thus on the field of battle, Arjuna sank down on the seat of his chariot,
casting away his bow and arrow, his spirit overwhelmed by sorrow.
And to this complaint, his chariot here, the Lord Krishna, replies, whens has come to the
this stain, this rejection of spirit in this hour of crisis.
It is unknown to men of noble mind, yield not to this unmanliness or Arjuna, for it does
not become thee.
Cast off this petty faint heartedness and arise our presser of the foes, and to give
point to his words Krishna goes on.
Our greavist for those for whom thou should not grieve, and yet thou speakest words
about wisdom, wise men do not grieve for the dead, nor for the living.
Never was there a time when I was not, nor thou, nor these lords of men, nor will there
ever be a time hereafter when we shall cease to be.
As the soul passes in this body through childhood youth and age, even so is it's taking
of another body.
The sage is not perplexed by this.
Heat and cold, pleasure and pain come and go and do not last forever.
These learn to endure.
The man who is not troubled by these O chief of men, who remains the same in pain and pleasure,
who is wise, makes himself fit for eternal life.
Of the non-existent, there is no coming to be, of the existent, there is no ceasing to be.
The conclusion about these two has been perceived by the sears of truth.
Know thou that that by which all this is pervaded is indestructible.
Of this immutable being, no one can bring about the destruction.
It is said that these bodies of the eternal embodied, which is indestructible and incomprehensible,
come to an end.
Therefore fight O Arjuna.
He who thinks that this slays and he who thinks that this is slain, both of them fail
to perceive the truth.
This one, neither slays nor is slain.
He is never born nor does he die at any time.
No having come to be does he again cease to be.
He is unborn, eternal, permanent and primeval.
He is not slain when the body is slain.
Now it's obvious I think to those of you who have listened to any other of these programs,
what Sri Krishna is talking about here.
When I was talking to you about the Upanishads, I explained at several points the fundamental
doctrine of the Hindus.
And that is that the innermost reality of man is not quite what we who have been brought
up in a Christian tradition called the Soul.
We have an inherited teaching, of course, of an immortal and individual soul, which is the
root principle of every human being.
But in the Hindu doctrines, the soul is not individual.
The soul is supra, individual, or as they would say in their technical language, the
Atman, the soul, or self, is really a better translation than so.
The Atman is identical with Brahman, and Brahman is the name which they use for the ultimate
reality which underlies this whole universe.
Now I don't want you to think of Brahman as a sort of vast blob of perfectly transparent
jello, which penetrates the whole world.
I think that's what many people imagine when they hear this kind of thing.
The whole point of the Brahman idea is missed.
When you form any image of it in your mind at all, even jello, even empty space or boundless
light.
Brahman is what we ourselves really are, what this whole universe is fundamentally and
actually.
There is no way of thinking about, of imagining that.
But very simple reason, that as water cannot rise higher than its own level, thought cannot
think what is higher than thinking.
It cannot conceive the mind which thinks and still less the power which generates the mind.
Our symbols for ideas about this supreme reality are vaguish and voidish, not at all because
that reality is vague and void, but because thought and imagination are annihilated in trying
to grasp it.
The essential teaching which the Gita is trying to convey is that the real center and soul,
the basic reality of you and I, is not the superficial consciousness which we ordinarily
call myself.
What we are fundamentally is this unthinkable source of life and existence named Brahman,
the expansive.
Nor must we confuse this unthinkable center of our lives with a sort of inner stuff, a so-called
blind force.
For one doesn't derive life and consciousness feeling and reason from mere stuff as
if the dead were able to give birth to the living.
You know, this notion of blind force as the ultimate reality which has been popularized
by a fassal scientism is merely the result of the fact that when the human mind gets out
of its depth it drowns and avomits up a lot of dead ideas.
And so Sri Krishna goes on.
He who knows that it is indestructible and eternal, uncreated and unchanging, how can such a
person slay anyone or Arjuna or cause anyone to slay?
Just as a person casts off one out garments and puts on others that are new, even so does
the embodied soul cast off one out bodies and take on others that are new.
Weapons do not cleave this self, fire does not burn him.
What has do not make him wet nor does the wind make him dry?
He is unclivable he cannot be burned, he can neither be wet it nor dried.
He is eternal or pervading, unchanging and immovable, he is the same forever.
He is said to be manifest, unmanifest, unthinkable and unchanging.
Therefore knowing him as such thou should not grieve.
Even if thou think is that the self is perpetually born and perpetually dies, even then
no mighty armed thou should not grieve.
For to the one that is born, death is certain, and certain is birth for the one that has
died.
Therefore for what is unavoidable thou should not grieve.
Perhaps that last passage needs a little bit of interpretation.
For to one that is born, death is certain, is a statement of course which is obvious
enough.
And not so obvious to us is, and certain is birth for the one that has died.
I should try to explain this a little bit, because it is a passage expressive of what
is called in India, the doctrine of rebirth or reincarnation.
If you will think for a moment of what you were before you were born, you will come to
the rather puzzling conclusion that you who before you were born are impossible to think
about.
Before you were conceived by your father and mother in the womb, you can't remember anything.
You don't even remember darkness or even a blank.
Your background, your past history, right at its beginning, seems to be a state of complete
annihilation of your ego, of your personality.
And yet, oddly enough, here you are.
After you die, you may presumably go again into a state which we can imagine only as complete
annihilation of complete nothingness.
And if so, you will once you be in the same sort of condition as you were before you were
born.
You came out of that state, though.
I should you be afraid to return to it.
This is perhaps a rather elementary way of expressing the Hindu doctrine of rebirth,
but I don't want to give the impression that the Hindu doctrine is, as it is imagined
to be by many people in the West.
A doctrine of the reappearance again and again in this life of an individual soul.
I think it is true to say that according to the strict doctrine of the Vedanta, there is
not an individual soul which passes from life to life.
The one who transmigrates is precisely this Atman or Brahman.
And this is why we have to imagine the state before birth and after death as blank and
annihilation.
Because thought is annihilated in trying to grasp the reality which lies deeper than thinking.
The finger that struggles to touch its own tip finds only the empty air.
And so, Krishna goes on.
The dweller in the body of everyone or Arjuna is eternal and can never be slain.
Therefore our should not grieve for any creature.
Further having regard for thine own duty, thou should not fault her.
There exists no greater good for Xatriya than a war in joined by duty.
I think it is just at this point that we puzzle about this book in relation to Mahatma Gandhi.
Let me explain the passage that I've just read.
Like Xatriya, is a member of one of the three great castes of Hindu society.
Those castes being respectively Brahmana, which is the priestly cast, the saccadotium.
Xatriya, the cast of warriors and rulers, of Vaishya, the cast of merchants.
They are roughly equivalent to the Lord's spiritual, the Lord's temporal, and the commons
of Medi-Evul-European society.
And each cast has its proper duty in life, which, in Sanskrit, is Svadalma.
And this is the phrase which Krishna uses here when he says, having regard for thine own duty
for thine own Svadalma.
Svadalma is probably best translated into English as vocation.
The Xatriya is one who has a vocation to fight.
That's his job.
Whereas a Brahman, or more particularly, one who has gone beyond cast altogether, one who
in India is called Asanyasin, corresponding in the Medi-Evul-West to the monks and hermits.
Those who have gone outside society, they do not have the vocation or the duty of fighting.
I think the clue to the problem of the Gita, especially in relation to that great non-violent
man Gandhi, is this.
Similarly, Arjuna's objection to taking part in war is a sentimental one.
He is unwilling to fight in the battle because of his depressed emotions in regard to slaying
his kinsman, or we would say, in regard to slaying one's fellow man.
If one would be a pacifist because one is merely squeamish, and is the kind of person
of whom one would say, well, he couldn't even hurt a fly, then surely there is something
phony about such pacifism because it is sentimental.
This does seem to be Arjuna's objection, and this is why Krishna says, in effect, your objection
to slaying is a fear of slaying, a squeamishness to slay, and because of this, you do not
have a genuine objection to slaying.
If you refrain from taking part in battle because you are frightened of so doing, or because
you are sentimental, you are not the kind of person who really has a right to abstain from
battle.
Now why does he say this?
The reason is that to the Hindu mind, one who abstains from what might be an evil action
through fear has not really liberated himself from evil.
Krishna would say, that so long as our conduct is motivated by fear on the one hand, or
by desire on the other, we are incapable of performing a truly moral action.
When those actions are truly moral, which are unmotivated, because if you are motivated
to do good by fear, your good may under other circumstances be evil.
This is the case with Arjuna.
He wants to refrain from war for the same reason, for which many other people would engage
in war.
Many people engage in war because they are afraid, and not at all because they hate.
The well situation at the present time might be said to be a situation of mutual fear,
where the only reason why someone might start a war would be for fear of the other side
starting at first.
After all we all know now that modern warfare is something in which neither side wins.
It is then fear more than anything else.
Fear that the other fellow should send the bombs over first is what starts a war.
And thus you see fear is no deterrent to war at all.
A person whose reluctance to fight is based on fear or squeamishness does not then
incrision as you have the right to renounce it.
And you see here the view is one which would probably commend itself to a man like Gandhi.
Because you could turn it round in the other way and say that a person who has to take
the step of being a nonviolent man, a man of peace, a pacifist.
He would have his vocation and his duty to do in exactly the same way as the Kshatriya
of the warrior.
He must not be nonviolent on sentimental grounds.
But rather because he sees it as his phadharma, that is to say his vocation in life.
And so a moment later, Krishna formulates the principle of action.
He says, therefore arise a son of Kunti, Arjuna, resolved on battle, treating a like
pleasure and pain gain and loss victory and defeat.
To action alone has our right never at all to its fruits.
Let not the fruits of action be thy motive.
Neither let there be in the any attachment to inaction.
Next in yoga, that is to say, in union with the principle with the self, do thy work
a winner of wealth, abandoning attachment with an even mind in success and failure, for evenness
of mind is called yoga.
One who has yoked his intelligence with the divine, casts away even here both good and
evil.
The false strive for yoga, yoga is skill in action.
The principle you see which he enunciates is to act without attachment to the fruits of action.
To do what you have to do without seeking either evil or good from it.
Now this is simply another way of saying to act without motive.
Teams, of course, from our point of view, impossible that a human being should act without
motive.
In our western way of thinking about ethics, we judge the quality of an action by the quality
of the motive.
And the whole notion of an action without a motive at all seems to be extraordinarily
foreign to us.
But as a matter of fact, if there is no such thing as an action without motive,
there is no such thing as a free or moral action.
Because so long as we have a motive, our actions are not actions, there are simply reactions.
Surely it's obvious that our motives are determined by our conditioning, by our environment,
our heredity, our social structure.
They give us motives, and these motives of the past determine the way in which we act.
Now, if my motive for doing good is for the sake of some sort of a reward, whether it's
in the ancient sense of going to heaven or the modern sense of being a real person or a regular
guy, or whether it's for in the ancient sense of going to hell or in the modern sense of being
a kid, I act motivatedly.
And therefore the things which I do by way of moral action are not actually free.
If, as we in the West have rather inconsistently but nevertheless rightly insisted, a moral
man must be a free man, a free man must be an unmotivated man.
In Western Christianity, it has always been thought that there is only one unmotivated
being and this would be God.
In the words of the ancient him in the Catholic Brevory, God is creation's secret
force by self-unmoved all-motion source.
God then would be the one who would act without motive, who would act spontaneously from
himself without having to be pushed around.
The point you see of the Hindu teaching is that in reality each one of us is that
on move one, that unmotivated one, the root and ground of our soul in mind is the same
as the root and ground of this whole universe.
Therefore, one in whom this is fully realized can act in an unmotivated way.
In studying the philosophy of the Hindus, we have to get used to the idea that it is really
an illusion to suppose that every event is motivated determined or caused by the past.
What they call karma or causation by the past is in fact Maya or unreality.
For in the Hindu philosophy, the present of the universe or the eternal now of the universe
is not the consequence of its past, but rather the past is always the consequence of the
present of the eternal now.
It hails behind it like the wake of a ship.
It does not stand before it and push it.
And thus, it is through the realization that he is that eternal now, not his past, that
Arjuna is able to act in a free way in an unmotivated way and thus go into battle, not
because he is moved to fight by hate, by squeamishness or fear, but because he carries out
his appointed place in a society in which it is vocation to be a warrior.
We may think it regrettable that society exists in which there is a vocation to be a warrior,
but let's not be sentimental in this respect also, because every one of us is unable to live
at all without killing something.
Some of us would like to rule out altogether the killing of our fellow men, but you see,
in the Hindu view of life, there isn't this rigid distinction between man on the one hand
and animals and plants on the other, which exists for us in the West.
Therefore, there are times in the Hindu view when killing is an unavoidable condition of
being alive, and this is one of the problems which the Gita sets itself to solve.
I've read these selections from the translation of the Bhagavad Gita that spelled B-H-A-G-A-V-A-D,
hyphen, G-I-T-A translated by Dr. S. Rada Krishnan, R-A-D-H-A, K-R-I-S-H-N-A-N.
As you may know, Dr. Rada Krishnan is the Vice President of India.
The translation is published by Harper and Brothers of New York.
It is one of the best of the many translations that I know and is provided throughout
with an excellent commentary.
