During the last two sessions, I've been talking to you principally about the philosophy
of the Lao-Tse book, the Dowder-Jing, and now I want to shift today over to Drungzer.
This, Drungzer, as far as we know, lived about 300 BC, maybe a little earlier than that.
And he is a very, very remarkable person, because the Drungzer book, he's also more exactly
his name, is Drung-Ju, but his book, sometimes called simply the Drungzer book, is quite
unique in the whole history of philosophy, because he's almost the only philosopher from
the whole of antiquity, who has real humour.
And therefore he's an immensely encouraging person to read.
But part of his humour is the art of exaggeration, and you always have to allow for that.
You always have to realize that he's slightly pulling his own leg.
He is, as in a group of people who are enthusiasts for something, but have humour,
who very often find that when they're talking among themselves, they carry their own ideas
to ludicrous extremes, and raw with laughter about it.
And Drungzer does that.
Now, for example, he has a great deal to say about the value of the useless life.
The whole notion of something of life, any moment in life or any event in life being useful,
that is to say, serving the end of some future event in life is to a Taoist absurd,
because nothing is useful at all.
The universe is viewed as perpisceless and useless through and through, because it's a game.
More than that, a game doesn't really convey the sense of this.
When a Taoist sage is wandering through the forest, he isn't going anywhere.
He's just wandering.
When he watches the clouds, he loves them because they have no special destination.
He watches birds moving around.
He watches the waves, lapping on the shore.
And just because all this is not busy in the way that human beings are busy, because
it serves no end other than being what it is now.
It is for that reason that he admires it, and it is for that reason that you get the
peculiar styles of Chinese painting in the Tang Song and later dynasties, where nature
in its way would wandering nature is the main subject.
When we say that something is without purpose, that's a put down phrase, say, well, it's
no future in it.
What's the use?
Now we say, what's the use?
And we need very much to realize that that question reflects our insanity.
What's the future in it?
What's the use?
The joy for the Taoist is that things have no use, and the future is not important.
Now you can exaggerate this, and drunks are done in a very humorous way.
By describing the ideal useless man, he's a hunchback.
And he's so deformed that his chin rests on his navel, and so on, but he says, now this man
is very admirable.
He's found the secret of life because when the social service workers come around, he's
the first to get a free handout.
And when the military officers come around to conscript people for the army, he's the
first to be rejected.
Therefore, he lives long.
And he also describes, in case of some travelers, came across an enormous tree, fantastic thing.
And they said, never did anyone see such a tree.
So they went up and looked at it, and first they tested the leaves, and found that they
were rough and disagreeable and no good to eat.
Then they looked at the branches and found that they were all twisted, and absolutely
no good for using a sticks.
Then they examined the wood and found it was full of pith, and absolutely useless for a carpenter.
So nobody had disturbed this tree.
It was not used for cutting down on any purpose whatsoever, and so it grew to an enormous
size and was of great age.
Now, John Sir is here pulling our legs.
He is not exactly asking us to take all that literally, but this is his way of doing things.
Then also he describes the behavior of the high form of man.
And he says, the man of character, in this case, the word death we were discussing yesterday,
the man of character lives at home without exercising his mind and performs actions without
worry.
The notions of right and wrong, and the praise and blame of others, do not disturb him.
When within the four seas, all people can enjoy themselves, that is happiness for him.
When all people are well-provided, that is peace for him.
Sorrowful in countenance, he looks like a baby who has lost its mother.
Appearing stupid, he goes about like one who has lost his way.
He has plenty of money to spend and does not know where it comes from.
He drinks and eats just enough and does not know where the food comes from.
This is the demeanor of the man of character.
Then by contrast, the hypocrites are those people who regard as good, whatever the world
acclaims as good, and regard as right, whatever the world acclaims as right.
When you tell them that they are men of dow, then their countenance is changed with satisfaction.
When you call them hypocrites, then they look displeased.
All their lives, they call themselves men of dow, and all their lives, they remain hypocrites.
They know how to give a good speech, until appropriate anecdotes in order to attract the crowd.
But from the very beginning to the very end, they do not know what it's all about.
They put on the proper garb and dress in the proper colours and put on a decorative experience
in order to make themselves popular, but refuse to admit that their hypocrites are torn.
But this explanation of the man, who is stupid in countenance and appearance,
and is wondering about as if he had lost his way, and doesn't know anything,
because it's based on the text and louser where he says,
the people of the world are merry-making as if partaking of the sacrificial feasts,
as if mounting the terrace in spring.
I alone am mild, like one unemployed, like a newborn babe that cannot yet smile.
On attached, like one without a home, the people of the world have enough and despair,
but I am like one left out.
My heart must be out of a fool being muddled and nebulous.
The vulgar are knowing luminous, I alone am dull, confused.
The vulgar are clever, selfish, assured, I alone depressed,
patient as the sea adrift, to seeming the aimless.
The people of the world all have a purpose.
I alone appear stubborn and uncoose.
I alone differ from the other people,
and value drawing sustenance from the mother,
capital M, that's mother nature.
So there is about, you see, the character of the Darwin's Sage,
who has depicted by it once, something of the fool.
Because the fool is the person who doesn't know enough to come in out of the rain,
who doesn't compete, everybody else gets before him to the prizes,
the material prizes of life, and even to the spiritual prizes.
The fool is, you see, the person who isn't going anywhere.
He sits by the road and the fool is like a Mongolian idiot child,
who isn't interested in survival, who will take a plate of food,
and run his finger around and make a wonderful slosh with the steel,
and then watch it drip from the tip of his finger.
He won't eat for quite a while, and then he'll play with it in all sorts of ways,
and then his attention will be distracted by something else,
and he'll chase after that, you see.
But if so long as you don't cross him, this is the case of the Mongolian idiot.
He remains the most wonderfully friendly, swinging kind of a cat,
but he has no ambition.
He doesn't fight for himself, and nobody can ever get him to.
So the fool has always been used as a kind of analog of the sage.
There's a Hindu verse which says, sometimes naked, sometimes mad.
Now as a scholar, now as a fool, thus they appear on earth the freemen.
And if you read the biographies of the early life of Sri Ramakrishna, or Sri Ramana Mahashi,
they are absolutely wild.
Now, not all of this, you see, again, just as in reading Jhongsa,
you mustn't take it too literally.
These things are said by way of a kind of overstress,
to correct another kind of overstress in the opposite direction.
When a Japanese scholar many years ago explained the teaching of Buddhism to me,
he said something I had never heard anybody else say,
that the Buddha taught, for example, that life is suffering,
in order to correct the wrong view that it ought to be pleasure.
He said that everything is impermanent, in order to correct the wrong view that reality lasts forever in time.
So the idea of the middle way is set up in this fashion,
by going to one extreme in order to correct another.
This is a very common Asian technique, and it is found especially in Zen,
where teachers, when they are asked about something sacred,
will always answer in terms of something secular.
What is the Buddha, the tree in the garden?
Then when you ask about something secular, they answer in terms of something sacred.
Let's see. As there is a master in his student working in the field,
and they are using a knife to prune, and the student suddenly says to the master,
give me the knife, and he gives it to him point first.
And so he says, but please let me have the other end.
The teacher says, what would you do with the other end?
See, the question immediately turns into a kind of a metaphysical thing.
So this playback and forth between the extremes has, as its interior design,
the awakening of the mind to polarity, that I was talking to you about yesterday,
this thing of mutual arising. Drongs are tells a story about this.
He says, a certain keeper of monkeys said with regard to their ration of nuts,
that each monkey should have three in the morning and four at night.
But at this, the monkeys were very angry, so the keeper said they might have four in the morning
and three at night with which arrangement they were all well pleased.
Now the number of nuts was the same, he goes on to say, but there was an adaptation
to the likes and dislikes of those concerned.
This then he says is the way of conduct of the sage.
Basically, Drongs' philosophy is a philosophy of relativity.
He makes a great deal of the point that there is no absolute standard of greater small
of important or unimportant.
There is a story, for example, of a sort of on-front terrible at a banquet,
and the speeches are being made after dinner.
And somebody gets up and says that the human being is the highest of all human
of all creatures, that the whole world serves humanity.
And a lot of pompous nonsense.
The small boy gets up and says that since tigers feed on human beings,
it's quite obvious, therefore, that human beings exist for the service of tigers.
For each one, sir, you must get the point of view
that small things are as big as big things can be, and big things are as small as small things can be.
Everything can be looked at.
As great or small, important, and unimportant, and all the steps between.
Because his conception of the world is essentially cyclic.
In his idea of the circle and Taoist and Zen teachers have a whole method of teaching by circles and drawing circles.
The center of a circle is any point on this conference.
You can begin anywhere. There's a co-an in Zen Buddhism, which asks the question,
Indra built the seamless Taoar, where did he start?
Now a seamless Taoar is like a sleeve with no, no seam on it.
It's a continuous cylinder of cloth, so the continuous cylindrical Taoar is the seamless Taoar.
Where do you start?
So in the same way, where does the circle start?
The circle of life, the cycle of life, the interdependence of the bees and the flowers,
the interdependence of long and short. You see, it's all circular.
And so there is nowhere, and there is everywhere that it can begin.
In the same way, when he discusses the organs of the body,
he makes a catalogue of all these organs and says, now which do you prefer?
It says, which one comes first and which one follows, which one rules and which ones are servants.
He said, it seems that there may be a governor in all this, but nobody could ever find it.
This is a very strange passage in Jwong's, which I've seen translated in many different ways.
There is an absolutely absurd translation of Jwong's are on the market now,
published in Menta Books by Professor of Chinese at Harvard, and it is absolutely ridiculous.
The whole thing is made by a man who is I'm sure an ex-missionary, and
keeps talking about God. Well, there is no expression in Jwong's of a God.
There is this expression,
which has almost the same meaning as Jwong, spontaneity of itself. This means something is so
through the power of heaven. Now, heaven is means simply the universe.
As you look out from earth, which is as it were, the center or the base,
everything else, the whole expense of the cosmos is ten, heaven.
And there is no connection in the idea of heaven with some sort of personal ruler of the universe.
So, the notion of God, you see, as we understand it, is really very far and indeed to Darwin's thought.
And when you see somebody translating this as God, it gives a very wrong impression
of this teaching. For example, there is a passage in which
shun asked Jung saying, can one get the Tao so as to have it for one's own?
And the sage answers, your body is not your own. It is the delegated image of
chun. And you know, missionaries translate God, because they read in the Bible,
man is made in the image of God. Your life is not your own. It is the delegated adaptability
of heaven. Your offspring are not your own. They are the delegated
seeds of heaven. You move, you know, not how. You are at rest, you know, not why. These are the
operations of the ways of Tao. So, how could you get Tao so as to have it for your own?
Similarly, there's a passage that says, when a drunk man falls out of a cart,
though he may suffer, he does not die. Because his spirit is in a condition of security,
he does not suffer from contact with object to be existences. If such a security may be got from
wine, how much more from can run, from being in accord with this spontaneous rhythm of the universe.
That's really what it means. But in the anxiety of missionaries and missionaries have been,
you see, the great Western, they've been the foundation of Chinese scholarship in the West.
To translate the scriptures into Chinese, they studied Chinese. They were the first people to study
Chinese. And they have constantly therefore had an interest in slipping Chinese,
Christian ideas into Chinese classics, just in the same way as when you read Monio Williams,
his Sanskrit dictionary, which is the based dictionary for Sanskrit study for centuries,
it's all made up with a missionary bias. But this notion, you see, of God in the sense
of the personal ruler of the world is totally foreign to Chinese thought.
There isn't even an idea in Chinese thought of the law of nature as we have it.
The motions of the body, the harmony of the organism, is not what it is in obedience to a law.
The Chinese do have an idea of law. This is the word Tser. This is an interesting character
nowadays written this way. But originally written like this.
This is a drawing of a sacrificial iron cauldron with a knife beside it.
And it comes from a time when the laws were inscribed on the sacrificial cauldrons
so that when people came to offer their sacrifices, they would read the laws.
A certain sage is objected to this and said that if the people know what the laws are
in the fixed terms of writing, they will develop a literature spirit.
That is to say they'll start haggling about what it really says and as you know that is the principle
occupation of lawyers. And they said that the thing is that you mustn't write it down like that.
And so the the dow is described as wood's law. We would translate literally lawless
but it means of course transcending this kind of law which is a specific law,
positive law I think is the correct legal term. So there is no notion in the dowist philosophy
or if one might almost say in Chinese philosophy as a whole for the certainly includes
Confucianism. No notion whatsoever of the world as responding to a bus.
So the body in other words does not have in it a ruling organ. Its order is the consequence
of or the operation of every part of it existing together simultaneously, arising mutually.
There's no governor. Now the difficulty you see in Johnson's philosophy,
the difficulty with human beings is they begin to think in terms of governing and ruling
and they set out to dominate themselves and their surroundings and invariably this leads to a mess.
He tells the story of an ancient man by the name of Polo. Polo was a great host trainer.
This is where we get the word Polo from. But he said Polo absolutely ruined the nature of horses.
Horses were nice charming creatures like Dean Swift's Winnings before Polo interfered and ruined
their nature. Then he says in other places a good carpenter doesn't need a square or a compass.
He works without it and this is fantastically true of Japanese carpinders.
You should see one of the fascinating things in going to Japan as these old style carpinders
working from the roughest architectural plans you've been imagined. And with the strangest instruments
but they have an uncanny neck of fitting things by feel and by eye. A great story is told
of ceremonial raising of the rich Polo of a new temple and it was being done by a certain
guild of carpinders and there was a rival guild in town which had not got the contract and they
were very sore about it. So during the night one of the members of the rival guild came and he
chopped off six feet or so of the rich Polo. And so when the master craftsman came in the morning
and all the priests that arrived the ceremony of raising the roof beam he looked at it and said
somebody has interfered with this. It must be our enemy guild they've cut off six feet of the roof
beam. Anyway he said never mind I will put it right and he took his hammer and ceremonial
is struck the beam and then said raise it and it was raised and it fitted exactly.
So the story is of course that the master carpinder knew that this would happen and he made the beam
too long.
That those sort of stories are always associated with the art of carpindery.
He needs no square you see because his sense of skill that is in his organism in his nerves
in his senses is much more subtle than anything that could be made with instruments.
There are all kinds of stories about the artists of the far east,
excelling and this kind of thing of knowing with tremendous precision exactly where something should go.
So a master is decorating a ceremonial tea room and he's with his student and the student wants to know
where to put a hook for hanging a bamboo vase for flowers on the wall and the master says there
and the student makes a little mark. Somewhat later student rubs out the mark gets rid of it.
But he remembers by a tiny little secret prick in the cloth where it should go and then he says
the teacher excuse me sir but I forgot where you said that thing should go and the teacher says
it was there and he puts his finger exactly on the same spot you see that's the sort of thing that
is admired. Without the slightest calculation you see now he goes on and says
the drawings are explained at length that music has been ruined by the five notes.
Says the five notes will make a man deaf and the five colors will make a man blind.
And what does this mean?
It's well it's the thing is that if you think there are only five notes you can't hear
if you think there are only five colors you can't see.
Moment you say this is a problem that we have in music that we've got a notation
which is our chromatic scale and the stave the way we can write music is limited to that possibility.
But there are all kinds of subtleties between everyone of our notes.
Same way in writing our rhythm we have to go in steps from whole note, half note, quarter note,
eighth note, sixteenth note, so on and we can increase the value of each by one half by dotting it.
But that's the limit of our rhythmic expression whereas in all oriental music you have an infinite
continuum, both of tone and of rhythm. They make the most extraordinarily complicated rhythms.
And the way you learn music is not from notation, not from measures, but from the living body of
your teacher demonstrating the ways of playing instruments. So you follow the teacher, the man,
instead of what it says in a book.
So the whole principle then is one of not a success in life through not pushing it around,
through not trying to govern it. He tells a story is a matter of fact,
trance has a very funny trick. A lot of his wisdom he puts into the mouth of Confucius.
He said the Confucius was one day doing this and he ran into louts and they had an argument and louts
of one. But then the next time he talks about Confucius teaching louts as doctrines.
And this to the immense confusion of everybody. But it said one day Confucius was
standing by a river where there was a tremendous cataract plunging down.
And he suddenly saw an old man coming out of the forest who fell into the river and suddenly disappeared
into the cataract. And he said, oh dear, too bad, probably some old fellow tired of life who
wanted to put an end to it all. The next moment, way down stream the old man gets out of the water
and starts bouncing along. And Confucius is amazed and he sends one of his disciples to catch this
fellow before he disappears. He said, sir, I was thinking that you were going to convince
your side and I suddenly find that you came out of that cataract alive. Do you have some special
method by what you do this? No, I have no special methods said the old man. I just go in with
the world and come out with the swell because I don't resist the water. I entirely identify myself
with water. So you see here he is utterly relaxed, just rolling around in the turn and not
resisting in any way. And so he is preserved. He goes with a stream, rolls with a punch or whatever
you want to call it. Again, of course, there is exaggeration in a story of this kind.
Just as the exaggeration in the story of the hunchback and the tree and so on.
Because true, wooway or letting go non-interference, it doesn't mean, for example,
flat in us. A lot of people, when they think they are relaxing, merely become flatty.
And if that is so, you know, you would, the perfectly relaxed person would slowly become
jello. And would spread out on the floor and finally drip through into the basin.
Relaxation, you see, is simply something that happens when there is too much
Yang in you, too much of the positive, you need to balance off with the Yin.
And the trouble is that human beings in their anxiety to control things exhibit too much
Yang, too much aggressiveness, too much of the male principle. They need the balance of the female.
And so all these exaggerations in the direction of let things go, let things happen. Don't
interfere. Stressing the end point of view to compensate for the excessive Yang.
And furthermore, the difficulty always comes. I remember reading a book or you must relax.
The difficulty always arises when, when feels I must relax, I've got to let go and let things happen.
How on earth do I do it? I, even in trying to relax, I'm all tense because I'm anxious that
it must happen and maybe it won't. And how do you do it? You see, you can't achieve
a way like that. What you have to understand is that you don't, you don't have to do anything.
There is no method, as the old man said. The meaning of Wutsu, when you call the Tao, is Wutsu
or Lawless, it means there is no method in it that you can master and do it.
What you have, it's all based on understanding of what else I call it, it's called Insight,
that you have to find out that there is nothing that you do as an source and cause of action,
separate from everything else. When you know that, that there is no separate acting you,
then there is no need to try to relax. The thing you have to see is that the flow of the Tao,
as I said yesterday, with the illustration of the bit people swimming in a strong stream,
that the flow of the Tao goes on anyway, just like the flow of time, for example, you can't
get out of the present moment. You can think about the past and you can think about the future.
But since you do that thinking now, the present is inescapable.
All right, now, the present moment does, doesn't that it has a sense of flow.
Time is going along. Life is going along. Time, actually, the clock time, is simply a measure
of flow, a way of going tick, tick, tick, tick, and counting the ticks. And say, well,
we've lived through so many ticks. But nevertheless, the real time has distinct from this ticking
thing is a flowing and yet it's still. Isn't that fascinating? It moves, but you're always there.
It's always now. You never get out of now. All right, now, if you can feel that, see,
that you can't get out of now, and you never will. See, now, realize that what we call now is the
same thing as Tao. The Tao, the course of things, the eternal now, the presence of God, anything
you want to call it. See, that's now, and you can't get out of it. So there's no need to get with it,
because you can't get out. See, that's beautiful. You just relax, and you're there.
So that's the principle of flowing. You can make all kinds of, very clever ways of
postponing, finding this out. It's terribly simple, but you can say, well, this is a very
spiritual matter, and I'm an uninvolved person, and it'll take me a great deal of time to
realize this in a more than an intellectual way. That's an excuse for playing your own game,
not finding this out. There are all sorts of elaborate ways of doing that, and you can put it off
by indulging in the most complicated systems of spiritual culture and yoga and so on and so forth,
and that's all right. I have an objection to you putting it off, if that's what you want to do.
But actually, it's always here and now. Just as you can't get away from now, you can't get out of the
dowel. That's the humor of the whole thing, and that's why Drungser has his beautiful light touch.
The, he says, the heron is white without a daily bath. The crow is black without being painted
in ink. And this is the same saying, you know, as in Zen, in the spring landscape,
there is nothing superior, nothing inferior. Flowering branches grow naturally, some short,
some long. Or they say a long thing is the long body of Buddha. A short thing is the short body of Buddha.
There are, therefore, you see, blogs and doughnuts, fat people and skinny people, tall people and
short people, cultured people and vulgar people. Even the Christian hymn says, the rich man in
his castle, the poor man in his gate, God made them high and lowly, and ordered their estate.
You know, we don't sing that now because we've got too much social conscience.
In, uh, in, uh, I think I'm, I'd probably read this passage yesterday, maybe I didn't
have a, uh, he had a, I'd certainly see Dronsor as this to say about it.
Those who say that they would have right without its correlate wrong or good government,
without its correlate misrule, do not apprehend the great principles of the universe,
nor the nature of all creation. One might as well talk of the existence of heaven,
without that of earth, or of the negative principle in, without the positive yang, which is
clearly impossible. Yet people keep on discussing it without stop. Such people must be either
fools or naves. Of course, one could always reply to Dronsor that there have to be fools and
naves, so that we can recognize the existence of sages.
Mr. Milokian.
Yes, he has it in another way here.
Speech is not me a blowing of breath. It is intended to say something. Only what it is intended to say,
cannot yet be determined. Is there speech indeed or is there not? Can we or can we not
distinguish it from the chirping of young birds? How can Tao be so obscured that there
should be a distinction of true and false? How can speech be so obscured that there should be
a distinction of right and wrong? Where can you go and find Tao not to exist? Where can you go and
find that words cannot be proved? The Tao is obscured by our inadequate understanding and words are
obscured by flowery expressions. Hence the affirmations and denials of the confusion and the
mudsian schools, each denying what the other affirms and affirming what the other denies.
Each denying what the other affirms and affirming what the other denies brings a
only confusion. There is nothing which is not this. There is nothing which is not that.
What cannot be seen by that? The other person can be known by myself. Hence I say,
this emanates from that. That also derives from this. This is the theory of the interdependence of
this and that. Nevertheless, life arises from death and vice versa. Possibility arises from impossibility
and vice versa. Affirmation is based upon denial and vice versa. Which being the case, the true
sage rejects all distinctions and takes his refuge in heaven. That's in the universe.
For one may base it on this. Yet this is also that and that is also this. This also has its right
and wrong. That has its right and wrong. Does then the distinction between this and that really
exist or not? When this, the subject, even that, the objective, are both without their correlates.
That is the very axis of dowel. And when that axis passes through the center at which all infinities
converge, affirmations and denials alike blend into the infinite one. Hence it is said that there is
nothing like using the light. See the axis of the opposites is the perception of their polarity.
The difference between them is explicit. But the unity of them is implicit.
The difference, the explicit difference between two ends of a stick. But the implicit unity
that they are ends of the same stick, you see. So that's the axis. The axis of dowel is the,
you might call it the secret conspiracy that it lies between all poles and all opposites,
which is implicit, esoteric or whatever you want to call it, that they're fundamentally one.
So that unity, whether it's between you and the universe, or whatever polarity you want to take,
is not something that has to be brought into being. If one brings it into being, one assumes that it doesn't
exist, that's called in Zen, putting legs on a snake, or a beard on a unit. There's something
unnecessary, you see. So it exists, it is always there, and you can see it so vividly. And actually,
put your almost, almost, put your finger on it and sense it. If you understand that the movement
of the dowel is exactly the same thing as the present moment. Now of course, if you try to grab
the present moment and get ready, get ready with your clapper and say, now, it's gone.
The finer and finer you draw the hairline on the watch. So don't know exactly when now is,
you eventually get to the point where you can't see it at all. But if you leave it alone,
and you don't try to grab the moment as it flies. But it's always there. See, you don't have to
market and have to put your finger on it, because it's everything that there is. And so the
present moment suddenly expands. And it contains the whole of time, all past, all future, everything,
you'll never have to hold on to it. It is believed generally in India that when a person sets
out on the way of liberation, his first problem is to become free from his past karma.
The popular theory of karma, the word that literally means action or doing in Sanskrit,
so that when we say that something that happens to you is your karma, it's like saying in English,
it's your own doing. But in popular Indian belief, karma is a sort of built in moral law or a law
of retribution. Such that all the bad things you do and all the good things you do have consequences,
which you have to inherit. And so long as karma-mic energy remains stored up, you have to work it out.
And what the sage endeavours to do is a kind of action, which in Sanskrit is called nishkama karma,
nishkama means without passion or without attachment, karma, action. And so,
whether he, whatever action he does, he renounces the fruits of the action,
so that he acts in a way that doesn't generate future karma because future karma continues you
in the wheel of becoming sanghsara, the round, and keeps you being reincarnated.
Now then, in that case, when the time comes that you start to get out of the chain of karma,
all the creditors that you have start presenting themselves for payment.
In other words, a person who begins to study yoga is felt that he will suddenly get sick
or that his children will die or that he loses money or all sorts of catastrophes will occur.
Because the karma debt is being cleared up. And there's no hurry to be cleared up if you're just
living a long, like anybody, but if you embark on the spiritual life for certain hurry occurs.
And therefore, since this is known, it's rather discouraging to start these things.
The, well, Christian way of saying the same thing is that if you plan to change your life,
shall we say to turn over a new leaf, you mustn't let the devil know.
Because he will oppose you with all his might if he suddenly discovers that you're going to escape
from his power. For example, if you have a bad habit, say you drink too much,
and you make a new year's resolution that during this coming year, you'll stop drinking.
That's a very, very dangerous thing to do because the devil will immediately know about it.
And what will happen will be this, he will confront you with the prospect of 365,
drinkless days. And that will be awful, you know, just overwhelming.
And you won't be able to make much more than three days on the wagon.
So in that case, you compromise with the devil and say,
just today, I'm not going to drink, you see, but tomorrow may be, you know, we'll go back.
Then when tomorrow comes, you say, oh, just another day, let's trial, that's all.
And the next day, you say, oh, one more day, won't make much difference.
So you only do it for the moment and you don't let the devil know that you have a secret intention
of going on day after day after day after day.
But of course, there's something still better than that.
And that is not to let the devil know anything. And that means, of course,
not to let yourself know. One of the many meanings of that saying,
let not your left hand know what your right hand doeth is just this.
And that was why in Zen discipline, a great deal of it centers around acting without
premeditation. As those of you know who read Heracles book, Zen in the art of archery,
it was necessary to release the bowstring without first saying now.
There's a wonderful story who may also have read by a German writer of Uncliced about a
boxing match with a bear. The man can never defeat this bear because the bear always knows
his plans and advance and is ready to deal with any situation.
The only way to get through to the bear would be to hit the bear without having first intended to do so.
That would catch him. And so this is one of the great, great problems in the spiritual life
or whatever you want to call it, is to be able to have intention and act simultaneous.
By this means, you escape karma and you escape the devil. So you might say that the
Taoist is exemplary in this respect. This is getting free from karma without making any previous announcement.
Of simply, the supposing we have a train and we want to unload the train of its freight cars.
You can go to the back end and you can unload them one by one in shunt them into the siding.
But the simplest of all ways of unloading is to uncouple between the engine and the first car
and that gets rid of the whole bunch at once. And it is in that sort of way you see that the
Taoist gets rid of karma without challenging it. And so it has the reputation you see
of being the easy way. There are all kinds of yogas and ways for people who want to be difficult.
And one of the great gambits of a man like Gourgev was to make it all seem as difficult as possible
because that challenge the vanity of his students. If some teacher, some guru says really,
this isn't difficult at all, it's perfectly easy. Some people will say, oh, he's not really the real thing.
We want something tough and difficult and when we see somebody starts out giving you a discipline that's
very, very weird and rigid. People think, now, there is the thing. That man means business,
see? And so they flatter themselves by going to such a guy that they are serious students,
whereas the other people are only dabblers and so on. All right, if you have to do it that way,
that's the way you have to do it. But the Taoist has is the kind of person who shows you the shortcut
and shows you how to do it by intelligence rather than effort, because that's what it is.
In so many athletic and artistic skills, you will find a teacher who teaches you how to do it without forcing it.
I won't study the piano. I'm absolutely no good at it now because I don't practice. I've
involved another thing. But I had an absolutely superb teacher for a while. He was a very,
very great musicologist. There was nothing sloppy about his standards. They were the highest
perfection. But when I first went to him, he said, let me see what you can do, so I played in
Ms. Colathe Sonata. He said, yeah, but the trouble with you is you're trying too hard. You're hitting
the piano and you should never hit a piano. He said, actually, all you've got to do in order to
play a piano is to drop your hands on it and you need to have relaxed arms, so he made me practice
for a while. He felt my muscles to see whether I was relaxed or not. And he said, I'll just drop
your hand on the piano. I don't care what notes you hit, but just drop your hand. Let it fall.
He said, there's enough energy in the weight of your arm to play as loud as you will, or as soft as
you will. But just let it drop. He said, that's all you have to do. Drop your hands and he kept feeling
my arms. He said, no, no, you're getting too tense. You must pretend you are loud, sir.
And he was a very educated man, he knew about his thing. And then he said, now, after dropping
your hands, all you've got to do is hit the right notes. And he said, you know, the same thing
is involved in making a very complex, true, and he demonstrated, he just dropped his hand on the piano,
and at the same time his fingers went full of it, like that. And there was this magnificent
ornamentation. Then we went on, we'd practice this for some time, he said, now let's get around
hitting the right notes. And he found immediately, I had a block on reading music,
because when I was a small boy and started piano at the age of roughly eight,
I had a testiferous teacher who was a mistress in this private school I went to in England.
And she used to sit beside you and hit your fingers with a pencil every time you made a wrong note.
Gregory Bateson, I think, was taught piano in as a child in such a way. And he has a total block
on reading music. He really's got a brilliant mind, you know, he's a mathematician and
great anthropologist, ethnologist and so on, but he has a total block to reading music.
And so this man had to teach me to overcome my block. And he said, now, first of all,
feel perfectly free to make mistakes. He said, everybody's going to make some mistakes,
and it doesn't matter if you make a mistake. And if you do make a mistake,
don't go back and do it over again, but just go on.
Supply as slowly as you like, don't hurry. Just so long as you keep the relative rhythm,
the relative values of the thing, go slow and take it easy.
Another thing is to not to pay so much attention to the notes,
but to the distances or intervals between them, because that is the significant jump.
And this sort of overcomes to the difficulty of key signatures, where we start out with,
as it learned, we started out learning music with this weird system that the lines on the
stave really represent the major scale of C. And that, therefore, when you put a key signature
at the beginning, you remember that every time you're exposing your playing in F, every time you hit
B, it should be B flat. Well, that's extremely tedious way of learning music,
and you just have to think in different keys. That's the only way to adjust to a key signature,
and play the thing according to the intervals appropriate for that key.
But you see, in this instance, this man, although he was a great perfectionist, and was highly
skilled in music, he used intelligence, first of all, to give you a short cut.
And then he also used relaxation to enter into a difficult thing by the easiest route.
Did I tell you yesterday that incident about the
seed, catching the seed by its hairs? And, yeah, I was making the point there about intelligence,
that when the wind blows and the seed responds, like a living animal,
you can't say that it's not a living animal, that it's only a seed with whiskers on,
because those whiskers on the seed are a manifestation of the intelligence of the seed
in the same way as the sail manifests the intelligence of the sailor.
So, Taoism is in that sense, what everybody is looking for.
The easy way in the short cut, using cleverness instead of muscle.
So, the question naturally arises, isn't it cheating? When in any game,
somebody really starts using his intelligence, he will very likely be accused of cheating.
And to draw the line between skill and cheating is a very difficult thing to do.
I'm sure if you've read life magazine recently or aware of the tremendous controversy going on
in the bridge world, because a champion team, a couple of partners, has been accused
before the whole bridge world of cheating. And what they did, I mean after all in bridge,
bidding is a way of letting your partner know what's in your hand.
