Some time ago, I received a visit from a woman who was a result of listening to these talks,
was wondering if I could help her to regain an experience which she had had while undergoing
a surgical operation, as is generally known, and aesthetic sometimes induce peculiarly
vivid and unusual states of consciousness.
And every now and then a person under anesthesia will undergo a specific and particular
experience, which is of the utmost fascination.
It's the kind of experience which I suppose we would ordinarily call mystical or spiritual,
which while it lasts, carries the most powerful sensation of understanding with complete
clarity and certainty, what is the mystery and meaning of the world.
As occurs sufficiently often, to have been made a subject of experimentation, perhaps
you know the story of the investigator who took doses of anesthetic for this purpose,
and equipped himself with pencil and paper, to record at the moment of awakening what
ever revelation might have been given to him, unfortunately the expected experience
took place, and for a brief period the investigator had the vivid conviction of complete
comprehension of this universe of life and death.
He regained waking consciousness, with the tail end of the sensation still upon him, grabbed
the pencil, and swiftly recorded the essential content of the experience just before it faded.
After several minutes during which his mind returned to its normal state, he looked at
what he had written, and they out upon the paper was the following immensely profound observation.
The thing in this universe is the smell of burnt almonds, my suppose, that all sensible
and hardheaded people would agree that this is just the sort of inanity to which all these mystical
revelations ultimately boil down.
In the clear cold light of rational consciousness, the seemingly inspired and utter convincing
knowledge of dreams, of drug delusions, and of mystical experiences comes down to just
the sort of idiotic anti-climax, masked in the poetic or exotic obscurantism of such phrases as
all his Brahman or the Divine Unity beneath the multiplicity of the world, it may sound
from a moment as if it meant something, but the essential nonsense of these feelings, and the purely
subjective character of the sense of insight which they involve, at once becomes obvious when
Brahman or the Divine Unity is replaced by the smell of burnt almonds.
We might settle for this conclusion, if some of us had not had the same sensation,
not under drugs or hypnosis, but when very wide awake, and I for one will not quarrel with the smell
of burnt almonds as the key to the mystery. I like it much better and feel it makes much more sense
than Brahman or the Divine Unity. For its very banality, its very inconsequential silliness
brings out the real significance of the experience in question. For the importance of the mystical
revelation does not lie in the precise nature of what everything in this universe is, it can be
God or Brahman or burnt almonds or apple sauce or anything you like. It's importance lies rather
in the simple sensation of wholeness, in the part of the sentence which runs
everything in this universe is no matter what. For the conviction which has come to the experience
is that his habitual sensation of isolation from his environment from the rest of the world
is an illusion and that has a corollary, his own deeds and misdeeds, fortunes and mis fortunes
are the same process as the changing seasons and the circling stars.
And unreasonable as it may seem, this gives him the sensation that his whole life, past,
present and future is somehow perfectly natural and in order and that he himself is not just
the mind enclosed in the sky, but the total process of the world.
The significance of this experience does not I think lie in any consequences or conclusions which
might be drawn from it. It is not an important experience in the sense that it is useful for some
other purpose. It's simply like playing or listening to music which is obviously
phony in the very moment that we do it for some ulterior motive such as to appear cultured or
to convey an ideological message. It's significance for human beings is not like that
of say the second law of thermodynamics, but like that of the Mozart Senators or the Arabesks on
a Persian rug. The significance of useful knowledge, like the second law of thermodynamics,
is precisely that by applying it, human beings may be enabled to go on experiencing such things
as music or love or mystical insight. But what could I say to the woman who under an aesthetic
had once had this experience and wanted it again more than anything else in the world?
Go and have another operation, get yourself some ether or mescaline or lysergic acid or take
up yoga or get thee to a nunnery, there are still other and much too pat answers to this question
as that she is failing to revive the experience by the very act of seeking for it.
As well tell a starving man that his very hunger is what prevents him from finding food.
For once a person has had an experience of this kind, he is gone. It's easier to get rid of an addiction
to heroin or to choose something more natural to get rid of the love of the opposite sex.
Now I could better say something like this. The answer is in the very experience which you have had.
Didn't you know then for certain, with utter clarity, that your whole life passed, present and future,
was somehow as you yourself put it, part and parcel of that universal harmony, which the Chinese
call the Tao. I feel sometimes that phrases like universal harmony are so happening, so almost
slushy and sentimental, but it's terribly difficult to begin to find the right word for this kind
of thing without sounding, like the Voltaism is dependless, without a sort of jumping on this
best of all possible worlds business, because the thing isn't like that at all. It's very,
very much stronger than the feeling that this is the best of all possible worlds. And the curious
thing about it isn't that it glosses over anything, but it makes the most awful things,
seem that way too without at the same time, making them cease to seem terrible. It's very peculiar.
Well, she had seen them for a certain, at the time of that experience, seen with total
clarity, that our whole past, present and future life was in some way, part and parcel of what we
are before, driven to call the universal harmony of the Tao. But what one doesn't seem to understand
them is that this still remains true of what one is today. You are in the stream,
when seeking for what you have lost and when feeling perfectly ordinary, no less than when you
were in ecstasy. You're not feeling the experience and you're striving to regain it
is as a matter of fact, the very future which you saw to be in such perfect accord with the process.
You let me remind you, all the celebrated tale that was told by Sri Rama Krishna,
the story of one of his disciples who had learned from the master that all the multiplicity of
this world is the illusory outward form of the one eternal divine Brahman underlying the entire process.
And having sat and listened to this exposition, the disciple got up and went his way and in passing
down a rather narrow street, he saw an elephant coming towards him and Mahoot riding on top of the
elephant. Well, the Mahoot saw the disciple wandering down the center of the road and shouted at him,
hey you get out of the way, this elephant isn't very nice, but the disciple thought now
the master Rama Krishna has told me that I am Brahman and that everything is Brahman and therefore
the elephant is Brahman and therefore it will be perfectly all right if I walk straight along,
the elephant will do me no harm since I realize this to be true. So he ignored the warning of
the Mahoot and approached the elephant and the elephant swung his trunk and swatted that disciple hard
and threw him into the ditch where he was scratched with the brambles. Well, he was very upset
and he came crawling back to Sri Rama Krishna and said, master you have deceived me.
I understood that everything is Brahman that I am Brahman and all other creatures is that not so
master and the master said yes it is so. Well, he said I was walking out in the road and I saw
this elephant coming towards me and it didn't seem to me to be necessary to get out of the way
when the Mahoot riding the elephant warned me to do so because I figured that I was Brahman
and the elephant was Brahman and I could come to know harm. You stupid man said Sri Rama Krishna
you didn't realize that the voice of the Mahoot was also Brahman and you should have heated that too.
So also in this case the one who is trying to regain the vision is the disciple
and the vision they are trying to regain is the elephant. But the way you are actually feeling now
and which you are ignoring because of your eagerness to feel some other way that is the voice of
the Mahoot and that too is Brahman. Nine times out of ten an observation of this kind will mean nothing
and will fall as flat as being told that everything in this universe is the smell of bird almonds.
But the tenth time it will dawn upon you as a statement of total and luminous clarity.
I do not think we need have any fear that this tenth time will never come for another
circumstances it has come again and again. Think back to school days. When with the utmost care
your teacher explained over and over the mysteries of percentage or sentence structure or
daylight saving time and you consistently failed to see the point and then suddenly something clicked in
your mind and the principle became clear. There is a Chinese poem which says words do not make a man
understand. It takes the man to understand the words.
