Now, as you know, this is the great discussion going on in what we call today the new theology.
The revolution within standard brand Christianity.
Because you see, for years and years, the clergy, the ministry of the various churches,
doctors of Piscopalian, Methodist, Baptist, Congregational, Unitarian, even in some cases,
disciples of Christ and Lutherans, their theological seminars have been discussing religion
in terms utterly different than you will normally hear from the pulpit.
And every graduate of an intelligent theological school has a sense of intense frustration
as he has to get out to work in a community or parish church, because he does not believe
what he is supposed to preach.
And this has, in a way, been true for a long, long time.
clergy, except in the Roman Catholic church, where the situation is somewhat different, are
very heavily controlled by the lady, because he who pays the Piper calls the tune.
And therefore, they are in a state of constant frustration, because those who contribute
most heavily, and therefore are most interested in the church, tend to be conservative-minded
people and they want that old-time religion.
Although it is a matter of fact what they call the old-time religion is really quite modern.
But still, that's what they want.
And there are people who, as I would say, would tend to be conservative in their whole attitude
to life, because you see, people of a more liberal disposition couldn't care less about
going to church.
In the British Army, they have a thing called church parade.
And the infamous story about a drill sergeant who got all the troops up for church parade
in a Sunday morning, and used to call out, Catholics to their right, Protestants to their
late, fancy religions in their middle.
And to the degree you see that intelligent people in our culture have any religion at all,
it tends to be a fancy religion.
Something in the new kinds of things that may be unity, Christian science, theology, Buddhism,
they down to, or some kind of special Protestant offshoot, such as the Fellowship Church
in San Francisco, or the community church in New York, and things of that kind, very liberal,
very left winged through logically.
So the new theology comes at this time to a very large extent, because A, the clergy
are fed up.
The Christianity has its back to the wall, and the Pope knows this better than anybody.
And so hand in hand with this ecumenical movement, there goes along a reconsideration
of what an earth it's all about, is there a God, is there God, and a lot of people are
boldly saying, that is to be abandoned.
As an English priest, Father Masco, it is the basic assumption of the secularist movement
in Christian theology, that life is a journey between the maternity ward and the crematorium,
and that is what there is, that's it.
And that only is the life that the Christian religion has to do with, and to encounter.
And therefore, more than ever, being a Christian, if it is an abandonment of God, or the idea
that the universe is supernaturally controlled, the Christian religion and fassens itself
therefore with peculiar and increased further to the figure of Jesus of Nazareth.
As one wit put it, there is no God, and Jesus Christ is his son, this son.
Because you see what otherwise makes you a Christian, is something strange about Christianity.
In it, it shares with Islam and Judaism, what we might call theological imperialism.
Christians, I have even the most liberal stripe, fervently believed that their religion is the best religion.
And they will state it by saying, either Jesus Christ is the only son of God, that's an
Orthodox way, it is a matter of fact, it isn't really an Orthodox way of saying it,
that's the way Orthodox people do say it.
All they will say, Jesus is the greatest man that ever lived.
The point is that you make a commitment to the following of Jesus as an historical personage.
And for some reason or other, people who commit themselves to this exclusive kind of
following of Jesus become exceedingly obstreparate.
Because they will either dam other religions outright or far more insidiously dam them with faint praise.
Old Buddha taught some very good things, you know, and we all are indebted to his great
moral principles, but, and then comes this pitch, you see, for the soul following of Jesus
as the Lord and Master, head and shoulders above all.
Well, the trouble with that has always been that, when you get into a theological argument,
with a person who is a Christian, you get into a situation where the advocate and the
judge are the same person. That is to say, Jesus is judged the best man in the world by the
standards of Christianity, because those are the standards with which this kind of person judges.
And therefore, and you'll find that people who leap to these judgments usually don't know
very much about any other kind of religion. The courses on comparative religion in theological
schools are shockingly superficial and grossly inaccurate. And so this is coming to the front now,
you see, in order to belong to the church really is to be saved and to be saved is to belong
to the inest in group. You have to have an in group, you see, if you want to know who you are,
you have to belong to something, say, if you want to distinguish yourself, because you know who you are,
because of the people who aren't like you, there you get a contrast. This is the basic arrangement
for a church. So, you see, if you want to be in some kind of an in group,
you must put everybody else beyond the pale. So Thomas Aquinas gave the show away, actually,
because he said that the blessed in heaven will often walk to the battlements and look down
and delight in the justice of God being properly carried out in hell.
So, but you may not believe in hell, you may be very liberal and after all it's not nice or
sophisticated nowadays to believe in everlasting damnation. But we have new words for it,
such as failing to be a real person, sinking below the human level or entering into final and
irremediable psychosis. All these are new words either for damnation or heresy. So,
you join and you know you're saved only if somebody else isn't. If somebody else is down.
Very difficult to believe or even to imagine a state of affairs where everyone and everything is saved.
You have to be a mystic even to think about that, because it requires having a state of
consciousness which transcends oppositions and you can't do that along the line of ordinary logic.
You have to have a new kind of logic which takes over at a certain point and this logic I'm using
at the moment by pointing out that damned people and saved people need each other. They are in a
symbiotic relationship with each other. They go together in the same way as the back in the front
of something because if something has a front it has to have a back too. And so the very fact that
fronts and backs go together indicates that there is a unity between these two opposed sides.
So also there is a unity between the damned and the saved. And it's only as you begin to realize
that you need the damned people in order to be saved. And that the damned people need the saved
people in order to be damned that you start laughing about it. And that laughter is very subversive.
And it's you know how it is. You are not supposed to laugh in church and not in court of law either.
There are places where laughter makes people nervous because it's supposed to be a sign of disrespect.
Now it may not be so at all. Dante said that the song of the angels
in paradise sounded like the laughter of the universe. But in church especially any
rather more serious kinds of church. Laughing is very bad form. Why? Because if you look at the
design of a Catholic church you will notice that it is based upon the design of the courtroom of a
king. And if you look at a Protestant church you will see that it is based upon the design of a law court.
Indeed the Protestant minister wears exactly the same robes as an American judge.
And all those pooms and box-like stalls are the same. You will find in the old fashion court with
the witness box, jury box and all that kind of thing. But you see the original idea of the
Christian church. Ancient Roman churches are called a basilica. That means the courtroom of a king,
the throne room, the altar is the throne of God. Now in a courtroom the king is very nervous
because anybody who takes it upon himself to govern other people and rule them at better watch out.
And therefore he always has his back to the wall. And he is flanked by attending guards.
And high ministers of state. And just so that nobody will get up and make trouble.
He has an either on their knees or flat on their faces when they come into his presence.
And of course no one must laugh. It's a big laughing and Mr. Big.
And so this was the pattern. This was the model. Upon which the Judeo Christian idea of God was based,
it is a political model. And the title of God is taken from the supreme
emperors of Persia, the Dian Khan, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords. And so in the English church
at Mourning Prayer the clergyman gets up and says, all mighty and everlasting God, the only ruler of
Princess, King of Kings, Lord of Lords who dust from thy throne behold all dwellers upon earth,
most graciously, Dane to behold our gracious sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth and all the royal family.
That's the picture. And the metaphor you may not believe,
literally that God sits on a throne or even has a body to put on one,
or that he wears a crown, or that he has a beard. But the image,
Collins, you're feeling about the character of God. And imagery is much more powerful than intellectual
concepts. You may know it says in the prayer book that God is the spirit without body parts or passions,
omnipresent to all places, be turned on through all time. And therefore one thinks as
hasty as vertebrate, or else of an enormously diffused sea of luminous jello,
filling all time and space. Everybody uses images, but behind those images,
are the old images that influence us in childhood. And if you still attend the church and you use that
imagery, you still think emotionally, you feel towards God as one would if you took it literally.
So this political model of God has dominated the West. And the world is related to God,
as subjects to a king, or as artifacts to a maker. We have of course a ceramic
model of the universe, because it's said in the book of Genesis that God made Adam out of the
dust of the ground. In other words, he made a clay figurine and then brew, blue, the breath of life
into the nostrils of the figurines of it and came to life. Now the Hindus don't have that model
of the universe to cope with. Because they don't look at the universe as God's creation
in the sense of being an artifact. They look at it as God's drama, because they see the world as
acted, not created. God is that which is pretending to be all this. And everybody is really God,
he's a mask of God, who is playing that he's you. But he's doing it so well that he's taken
himself in because he's the audience as well as the actor. It's a really successful play.
Because the good actor, although you know a play, is a just a play. A good actor is going to
try and make you think it isn't. He wants to get you trying. He wants to get you sitting on
the edge of your seat in anticipation. And God, as the best actor has convinced himself
completely that the actor's real. The Chinese again have a different model. Their model of the
universe is an organic one. It is a great organism. It is alive. It grows. It is an intelligent order.
So those are the three great models of the world. When the West stopped believing seriously
in God a long time ago, they however retained the idea of the world as an artifact. And so
we graduated from the ceramic model of the universe to the fully automatic model, which is
actual common sense for most people living today. I returned to the point then that the clergy
and the church people don't really believe in God in the old fashioned sense of the word God at all.
If they did believe the Christian religion in some of its orthodox forms seriously, they would
be screaming in the streets. And even the most far lunatic fringe, Jehovah's Witnesses, are even
more or less polite when they come and call at your house. Because if they really believe that
you were going to hell, they would make more fuss about you than if you had the bubonic plague.
But nobody really takes it that seriously any longer. And that means they don't believe in it.
They know they ought to believe in it. In fact, many sermons are exhortations to have more faith.
Which means that we all recognize that we don't really believe in this. And we ought to.
We feel very guilty about it. We don't have the moral strength to believe in this.
But it isn't only a matter of moral Spain. It's a matter of being asked to believe
what most people feel is nonsense. That the world is run on the lines of a state.
How, for example, can you be a citizen of the United States?
Having taken an oath that a Republican form of government is the best form of government
and believe that the universe is a monument.
So what has happened is, intelligent people have always realized that this political model
of other cosmos won't do. Now actually, no serious theologian ever did believe
for God was the old gentleman with whiskers on the golden throne. Never.
What the Bishop of Woolidge says in his book, Honest to God, you know, that there isn't some sort of
a sum, one out there. He is very naive in a way because he could have taken huge quotations
out of St. Thomas Aquinas, out of the great fathers of the church, from Oregon, from Clemente
of Alexandria, from St. Gregory Naziansus, from St. John of Damascus, from St. Basil the Great,
from St. Augustin, from St. Ambrose, from Bernard of Cleopoles and Albert the Great. He could have
quoted all those perfectly orthodox, very correct theologians, and shown that they never believed
in a God like that with whiskers. And he could have come forward and said, you see,
this is a perfectly orthodox book. And I'm not a revolutionary, I'm just going back to the real
old time religion. He didn't do that. Do you know why? He told me. He never read those writers
in theological school. He was entirely confined to biblical studies. I never got as far as that,
I see. So, but it's the same with ever so many people. One of the reasons why so many people
turned to an Oriental religion was that the level, the intellectual level at which Oriental religions
were first presented in the West was so much higher than the intellectual level at which Christianity
was presented at the local church. If you lived in India or Selang, of course there would be
the local Buddhist monastery and it would be just as junky as the stuff was around the local church.
They don't tell people all about the Great Void and how to practice meditation and those things.
That's for specialists and minority. All they care about is gaining merit mostly by making
contributions to the clergy for a better circumstances in your next life.
Or getting out of evil karma. That's the real thing. The popular Buddhism is about.
But you see the trouble in the West is that everybody's getting educated. There's a terrific literacy
and therefore the public has to be treated as if it were intelligent. You can't say the
public be damned anymore. There's too many intelligent people. Now, let's look at the lineup.
What sort of a situation is this really? For my part I would say the God that is dead is this
political model God. However conceived the divine paternalistic authority who rules the universe
and to whom you as an ego are related as a subject to a king by analogy. See?
Now, that one just isn't holding up. But what's the alternative?
Especially think about what could be an alternative for Western people with a Christian background.
What other kind of God could we have? Well, one of possibilities none.
And this is what people like Altizer are discussing. He's only far left of this new theology.
I would say a man like James Pike is on the right of the new theology. He very definitely believes in God.
He's a fierce but he doesn't believe in anything with whiskers on it. Not as he really believe in the political model.
Are we going to settle then for the fact that the universe is just what it appears to be?
Or are we going to have a very refined conception of God? Which would be called it instead of he?
That makes a lot of difference very powerful what pronoun you use.
Or even he she, the Christian scientists talk about the father mother.
It's a sort of complicated people. If you ask a little bit weird it is rather simple but then when you say it
Does it mean that God is something like electricity?
Which doesn't seem to have any independent intelligence of its own. You can use it intelligently.
It's just entity. It does something go Zoom. See? Is that God? Is God it like that?
Or what?
Well, it's a funny thing, but it's very difficult to be a complete atheist.
Relatist. Like in the House of Parliament in England, when in 1928 the Church of England wanted
a new prayer book, a revised prayer book, because the Church and the State are inseparable in England.
And the House of Parliament had to vote on whether this prayer book might be used.
And somebody got up and said, this is perfectly ridiculous.
And the semblage which contains a number of atheists voting on the inner politics of the Church of England.
And another member got up. He said, oh, I don't think that any atheist here not really.
We all believe in some sort of something somewhere.
Now you see, in the theological world, he just doesn't do to believe in some sort of something somewhere.
Because one thing that theologians detest is vagueness.
You should listen to them.
Even no God at all, because that's clear and precise. No beating around the Bush home, and you know,
it's just fuzzy thinking to have the great universal mind that we can undifferentiated
aesthetic continuum. That's all some sort of something somewhere.
We'll be thinking, either no God or a God with a definite character and a clear model will
and precise standards who will not be pushed around the biblical God.
Are we?
What do you do? Do you put your mind into two watertight compartments?
One of which you're a breast of science in the modern world and all that kind of thing
in the other compartment, but sitting there nothing to do with that is a completely cut off thing
or religion where you believe in absolutely ludicrous propositions. A lot of people do that.
But a lot of people want a religion which is difficult to believe in, because that's a kind of
a test of faith, but you can swallow it. What do you do? Do you put your mind into two watertight
compartments? One of which you're a breast of science in the modern world and all that kind of
thing and the other compartment, but sitting there nothing to do with that is a completely cut off
thing or religion where you believe in absolutely ludicrous propositions. A lot of people do that.
But a lot of people want a religion which is difficult to believe in because that's a kind of a
test of faith, but you can swallow it. It's like the story about Abraham being told to sacrifice
his son Isaac and he was about to do it because you do what you're told. It's a test of faith.
People like the security of a definite religion. I mean you got to believe in and this is the truth.
I was once having an argument with a Jehovah's Witness and he said don't you think that if there
were really a loving God who was concerned about the human race, that he would provide us with an
infallible textbook that would tell us how to live. I said he would do nothing of the kind.
It would completely destroy the human mind. You know you would never have to think if that was the
case. So, while there is that, here is then this possibility. See is it to be no God,
is life just this trip from the maternity ward to the crematorium and that the issue of religion
is to improve that trip. That is to say through social concern, through getting rid of poverty
and war and exploitation and disease is that the whole business of religion or is there something else.
Those who take this view, which we will call the secularist position in reality, are of course
strongly influenced by contemporary philosophy, especially in that form, which is called scientific
empiricism or logical positivism, which maintains that the idea of God is not a fallacy,
but is a meaningless idea. In other words, the proposition that there exists God
and that God is the origin and creator and governor of everything that is happening. They maintain
that those sentences are utterly devoid of meaning. As much so as if I were to say everything is out
because they will say no logical proposition can be made about all processes whatsoever
because all propositions are labels on boxes and you can't have the box containing all
boxes because this box would have no outside and therefore it wouldn't be a box.
So all propositions, all words must refer to classes of some kind and you can't have the
class of all classes and also they would say the notion that there is a God is meaningless because
it doesn't help you to make any prediction. All they would can ask it in this way. What evidence
supposing somebody could bring it forward would completely satisfy you as disproving the existence of God
and no believer in God can think of any evidence that would conclusively prove that there wasn't a God.
Just like psychoanalysts are completely incapable of thinking of any evidence which would disprove
the existence of the Eid at this complex. So they on logical grounds take this position
and so since many theologians are in fact influenced by modern philosophy take these arguments
seriously they would like to move secularized the whole conception of religion or to put it in
Bonhoeffer's words have Christianity without religion. Well now when you might say there is
nothing to life except the trip between the maternity ward and the crematorium that's what
it is. I've heard something like that before. When asked what is the Buddha, a Chinese master replied,
it's windy again this morning. Another Buddhist master on his deathbed wrote the poem
from the bathtub to the bathtub I have uttered stuff in nonsense. The bathtub in which the
baby is washed at birth and the bathtub in which the corpse is washed before burial. All the time
between he said I was going Eid at Eid. Now what about those poems? Do they mean what they say?
Well, not quite. There are something different here because they are based on a life devoted
to the discipline of a very particular kind of meditation.
Culminating in a completely shattering experience which is very difficult to talk about.
But generally speaking it is the encounter with eternity with the eternal not necessarily in the sense
of that which goes on and on and on through time. But the eternal is the timeless.
That which transcends time is the on measurement in terms of hours and days.
And when a person who is in that state of consciousness or has been through it looks at
that the ordinary everyday world. It's true he sees the ordinary everyday world as we see it,
but with a very very extraordinary difference. And if we would have to put that difference into some sort
of western Christian influence language, he would perhaps say don't you realize that sitting around here
in this room with our ordinary everyday faces and clothes and personalities.
We are sitting smack in the middle of the beatific vision and that this sitting here in this room
is infinity and eternity precisely. It is it and this is the beatific vision.
This is God. And it feels that way too. Really does. It's something like it.
But in this kind of religion they still have temples they have butters and they chant
sutras and offer incense and ring gongs and all that kind of thing. But they are always saying
that the highest religion to get really to get there you have to kill the Buddha.
Suppose a clergyman got up one day and said every time you say Jesus Christ you have to wash your
mouth out. Or if you meet God the Father, kill him. If you meet God the Son, kill him.
If you meet God the Holy Spirit, kill him. If you meet the Pope, kill him. If you meet Saint Augustine,
kill him. If you meet your Father and mother, kill him. Kill him all right away.
All right. But what I've been saying is simply translating into Christian terms a Buddhist
teacher talking about the year 800 AD. So he said only he put the Buddhist names in where I put the
Christian ones in. But I don't think this is what has happened in the movement of the new theology.
I think that what's happening there is that they are just getting rid of God.
This is not this other thing I'm talking about which could be called the religion of no religion.
You see, if you could take this right into Christianity because it's said that every Christian is a Jew.
You see we use the Jewish scriptures as the Old Testament. So every Christian is a Jew.
Do you who are supposed to believe in the 10 commandments? Well, one of them says,
thou shalt not make to thyself any grave and image. If anything that is in the heavens above or the earth
beneath or the waters that are under the earth, thou shalt not bow to them no worship.
And that is what this thing I've been talking about is, it is a destruction of idols.
Because the most dangerous grave and images are not those which are made of wood and stone,
they are those which are made of ideas. And it is well known to the great mystical tradition
of the world, all over the world. That the sort of supreme vision can only come
when you have got rid of every idea of God whatsoever. It would be like as I've often used this
image cleaning a window on which somebody has painted blue sky. Well, to see the sky you've
got a scrape off the paint. Well, you'll say my goodness, you shouldn't take that nice blue painting off.
It's very good. It was done by a great artist. See, I'll pretty the clouds out. You mustn't do that
because we won't have any blue sky anymore. See? So in that spirit, the great mystics have always
ceased to cling to God. That is because the only God you can cling to is the idea of God.
In order to discover God, you have entirely to stop clinging. You see, why does one cling to God?
For safety, of course. You want to save something. You want to save yourself.
I don't care what you mean by saved, whether it just means feel happy or feel that life is meaning.
Or, you know, there's somebody up there who cares. So one cleans. And if you don't
cling to God, you cling to something else. The state, money, sex, yourself, power. These are all false
gods. But there has to come a state when clinging stops. And only then does the state of faith
begin. People who believe in God don't have any faith because they want something to hold on to.
So real faith is when you do not hold on to anything anymore.
In the Christian tradition, this is called the cloud of unknown. There is a book about written by
a 14th century British monk, the nuns. And he got it from Dionysus, the area of the guide,
who assumed the name of St. Paul's Athenian convert. He was a Syrian monk living in the 6th century.
Both mice the Eckhardt, St. Thomas Aquinas, John's go to Syrigina, and many other great
medieval theologians, studied Dionysus, the area of the guide. He wrote a book called the Theologia
Mystica in which he explains that in order to come to full union with God, you must give up
every conception of God whatsoever. And he enumerates. Don't think that God is oneness or
threeness or unity or spirit or any kind of anything that the human mind can conceive. He is beyond all that.
In what is called, this is called applephatic theology. This is a Greek term contrasted with cataphatic.
When you speak catathatically, you say what God is like. So this man Dionysus wrote two books,
one was called the Divine Names, and that was cataphatic theology. The other was called the Mystical
Theology, which is apropatic. Cataphatic, what God is like according to analogy. He is like a father.
We do not say God is a cosmic male parent, but God is in some respect like a father, like spirit.
Like we say nowadays, like man, it's like it's raining, you know, as a certain relative to that statement.
So this is the cataphatic language. The apropatic says what God is not.
And all those theologians in the following of Dionysus said the highest way of talking about God
is in negative terms. Just as to use Dionysus' own image, when a sculpture makes sculptor, makes a figure.
He does it entirely by removing stone, taking something away. So in the same way, Saint Thomas
Aquinas said, because God by his infinity exceeds every idea to which the human mind can reach.
The best way to speak of him is by remotion. That is to say by removing from our view of God,
every inadequate concept. This is what the Hindus call netty, netty, saying of the Brahman of the Supreme Reality.
It is not this, it is not this.
But this intellectual operation of destroying concepts must go hand in hand is a show we call it psychological operation,
which is ceasing to cling to any image whatsoever, or simply ceasing to cling.
Now why?
Well, because there's no need to.
There's no need to cling, because when you were born, you were kicked off of residence.
And it was a big explosion, and a lot of other things are falling down with you,
including some pretty large lumps of rock. Well, I'm going to call the earth.
And it won't help you to cling to the rocks when you're falling off the precipice.
It may give you an illusion of safety.
But everything is falling. It's falling apart. That's what the ancient statement, all is transient.
Pantare, or flows in the words of helicopters.
And you can't cling to anything. It's like grabbing a smoke with a non-existent hand.
That's all the cling you will ever achieve, all it does is make people anxious.
So when you come to the realization that you cannot cling to anything, that there is nothing to cling to,
there are transpires and inner change of consciousness, which we can call either faith or letting go.
And then suddenly the thing hits you. In Sanskrit, they put it this way.
Tatva Masi means literally that, or as we would say, you're it.
And if you are God, then you can't have an idea of God.
Any more than you can chew your own teeth.
You don't need one. The sun doesn't need to shine on itself.
Nives don't need to cut themselves.
Your eyes don't need to look at themselves.
What color is your head?
To your eyes.
It doesn't black as it.
Can't see anything.
Matter of fact, the way it feels inside your head is what you call what it looks like outside.
All of these things you see outside are states of the nervous system in the brain.
That's how it feels. That's how it looks inside the head. And you said, well, I thought that was what was outside.
True.
Same way.
When the Zen Master suddenly discovered that carrying the pale
with water in it was a miracle, he discovered that.
He realized there isn't anything except God.
And boy, if you really know that, you see, you don't need to have a religion.
But you can have one because it's a free world. I mean, if you want to
try and express this in some way and all religion is pure gravy after that.
See, any outward manifestation of religion.
You know, it's like a man with lots of money making some more.
Only it's quite unnecessary.
But so in the according to the very best theologians,
it was never necessary for God to create the world.
Didn't add anything to him.
He didn't have to do it. He was under no compulsion.
So he did it out of what Dionysus, the area of a guy,
called Ipa Pleiries.
Or we would just analyze it. Hyper Pleiries. Superformers.
In other words, for chicks.
I mean, you know, we don't like using that language, but it's completely
contemporary and exactly right. That's what the Bible says.
Only it puts it in a more sedate way. It says,
his majesty did it for his pleasure.
You know, that's the way you talk about somebody who was the king.
His chief of talk has said, you know, we are not amused.
And it sells in the book of the Proverbs,
that where the Divine Wisdom speaks,
and speaks, you see, as an attribute of God, standing aside from God,
sort of primitive polytheism.
And Wisdom says that in the beginning of the world,
her delight was to play before the Divine Presence.
And especially to play with the sons of men.
The word in Hebrew is play, but in the King James translation,
it is rejoice, because that is a more sedate word than play.
You may rejoice in church, but not play.
You may not have fun in church, but you may rejoice.
See the difference. So then, the point of the matter is then there was no reason to make the world.
And it was done for making celestial woopy.
That's why the angels are laughing. They're just splitting their sides.
Only when you hear it in church, everybody's forgotten what alleluia means.
It's lowing. Don't you see alleluia? Hallelujah.
It's like, but you know, it's just verbal.
And it's like bird song. Bird song isn't about anything. It's just suffocates.
Why do you sing? Why do you like dancing? What's music for?
That's what this hallelujah does. So when nothing is being sung to,
when one gets to that point, everything blows up.
This is what's meant by satory in the sudden awakening.
And you suddenly say, good heavens, what was I making all that fuss about?
Because here we are. So what we're looking for all the time.
That's what it's right here. And that's the thing.
And you realize that you basically, through and through, are all this.
Only you've got into a kind of a funny illusion.
I think that we get into that illusion in rather a complicated way
through our upbringing and children.
Because many little children know from the beginning what it's all about.
And they haven't got words to put it in.
That's the whole problem with child psychology.
What child psychologists is ideally looking for is an articulate baby.
It can explain what it's like to be a baby.
Never get there. But by the time you're teeth, by teaching the child to speak, you mess it up.
You give it this language and you can't think big thoughts like that with this funny limited language.
Especially with the words they start children out with.
And then finally when they've got the poor thing completely hypnotised,
they tell it the most preposterous things.
They tell it that it must be free.
They say to you, you child are an independent agent and you're responsible. See?
Now therefore, we command you to love us.
And in other words, we require that you do something which will please us only if you do it voluntarily.
There he is. Do you want the people of mixed up?
So, but I'm afraid you see that the new theology isn't on to this.
The new theology really is serious about there not being in your God and that the universe is therefore,
a rather pitiful predicament in which we have caught has some compensations.
But what all this is a continuation of the 19th century philosophy,
the fully automatic model, which is that there is an essentially stupid universe.
It's a mechanism. It is a gyration of blind energy in which human intelligence and values happens to be a fluke.
And a rather uncomfortable one because nature doesn't give a damn about us.
And so we have to fight it. And now all that is pure mythology. It is grossly unscientific.
And about most people believe it, it's common sense for today.
But what an opportunity, though, there is in the new theology and in this whole firm ent going on,
to get them to see this other point of view. And realize that when you get rid of God,
you are all you are doing is you are destroying an idol. And all idols must be destroyed,
respectfully, not like those wretched piratans who went around destroying all the saints figures
and the stained blasphemy medieval churches. That was disrespectful iconoclasm.
Respectful iconoclasm would be, for example, every Easter Sunday, the Bible should be ceremoniously burned.
Because if Jesus is truly risen from the dead, you don't need the Bible anymore.
Neither round. Available. You don't need the books. The planet up, ceremoniously with great respect.
Because certainly God doesn't take himself seriously. If he did, I should have to think what would happen.
