Now, what I want to talk to you about this afternoon, are some of the aesthetic principles
underlying both Chinese and Japanese arts and their deriving from these Taoistic and
buddhistic philosophies that have inspired them and to speak about them fairly technically.
When the language of Taoism, there are certain words used which are the foundations of
their aesthetic ideas.
One of these words is the uncapped block and another is unbleached silk and as I already
intimated and talking to you about the Taoist view of the relationship of man and nature.
The Taoists make a distinction between the natural and the artificial and seem to be all
on the side of the natural and rather against the artificial, although you must be cautioned
against taking this too seriously, too literally.
You might say, of course, that the distinction between the artificial and the natural
is an artificial distinction, because really, in truly a human building is no more no less
artificial than a bird's nest, but the Taoists use a kind of art and a kind of poetry
which you could call indicative.
That is to say, while understanding that everything that man does is natural, some things
that he does are more natural than others.
That is to say they look more natural, they go that way.
And so the idea of unbleached silk means silk in the raw, raw silk, natural silk.
And so in the same way, the uncoved block is the sort of stone that would be selected
for a Chinese or Japanese garden.
Chinese stones tend, as I see it, to be rather more elaborate, rather more fussy than Japanese
stones.
And I think that in the art of Bonseki, which means growing rocks, the Japanese are a bit
more sophisticated than the Chinese, although this doesn't often happen.
But the Japanese are masters of growing rocks.
So this rock that you would find in a Japanese garden is the uncoved block.
Even though it may have been, what has happened really?
It's what we call in the West, an objade tuve, where the artist instead of making something
selective, he finds a glorious thing and shares his finding with other people and that
finding is a work of art.
And you see that is connected with the whole thought in this tradition of aesthetics in
the Far East.
That superb art is a work of nature.
It is not something imposed upon nature, even though as you've seen in many Japanese
gardens, that there are very complex espalier work on trees and that an enormous amount
of pruning and trimming is done.
And in fact, the discipline of the garden is amazingly complicated and requires a great
deal of care.
But the object always is through the discipline of the art to make the garden seem more
natural than it would look if you left it to itself.
You understand that?
It's to work upon nature with skill and craft, but to move in the direction in which nature
is already going.
So that the uncarved block may be extended into a sculpture.
But what the cover to make the block uncarved even when the sculpture is finished, what
the sculptor is going to ask the block in the first place is, what do you want to become?
In other words, along what lines have you already started in the direction of a sculpture?
And I will cooperate with you and bring it to completion.
So that's the principle really.
You see that underlies judo, judo means the gentle way, the gentle dowl.
And it is the art of going along with nature.
It is also called Uwe or Mui in Japanese.
And not doing nothing literally, not being, because after all its man's nature to act,
you can't do nothing literally.
But to act, Mui without, really, it is to act without feeling that your actions are separate
from nature.
When you feel that everything you do is simply part of the course of things, then the
way in which you do things is changed.
You wouldn't think so.
It isn't logical that it should be.
But nevertheless, if you really feel that you can't deviate from the dowl and that it lies
behind everything that you do, your type of action, your style of behavior, will in fact
be changed.
And it will be in the direction of your seeming to other people in some ways to be more
passive than you might ordinarily be.
And the difficulty here is that Westerners, when they hear about Buddhism and dowlism
and the sort of thing, they interpret it one sidedly as passivity.
And don't see that what sometimes looks like passivity is cleverness.
There's businessmen often know if you leave letters unanswered for a month.
When you return to the many of them have already answered themselves.
And sometimes when you sit and do nothing, you avoid making very serious mistakes, which
would have arisen if you had acted prematurely, if you had done something about it.
I've practiced this inactivity of this kind for many years and have always been accused
of being lucky because when I should have done something and been up and at it, I spent
in sat and been nothing and then when it turned out all right, this is terrible.
Just like, no, I know you haven't said that.
So I'm still married to you.
Yeah, no, it's all right.
But anyway, this is so, isn't it?
So this tendency to look inactive and to go in the direction in the arts of a kind of
primitivity, which we know in the word shibui, the quality called shibui in Japan,
is a certain kind of sophisticated primitivity.
Listen to these contradictions, these paradoxes, the sophisticated primitivity, controlled
accident.
Where you see man and nature are really collaborating, man as the controller, the reasoner,
the logical being and yet at the same time, not ruining life by making it all logic
and all control.
To have logic, and to have control, that is to say in short, to have order, you have
to have randomness because where there is no randomness or cannot manifest itself.
Well now, in the vocabulary of Japanese aesthetics, there are a number of terms which you
should understand thoroughly and which are basic.
The first is sabi and that goes along with something that rhymes with it, wabi.
So often, Japanese people speak of wabi sabi or sabi wabi has a kind of mood of certain
art feeling or a zen taste and then there is a wari, which I have mentioned in passing,
as another kind of mood, there is yugen, there is furu, such words which designate the
basic moods of painting and poetry and so on.
Now to begin with sabi, the basic feeling of sabi is loneliness.
One of the great paintings that illustrate sabi is the lonely crow on a tree branch.
It is the feeling of the hermit.
It is the feeling which the garden artist tries to create when in a crowded country.
He wants to give you the sensation of being a way off in a mountain landscape.
So this sense, you see, of solideriness, of being able to wander off on your own is sabi
and there is a thing, of course, that any sane person has to have, one has to have privacy.
You have to have space in which to be alone, so as not to become a rubber stand.
You see, it is often thought that eastern philosophy is against individuality.
And this is not true.
The unity of man and the universe is not a loss or a merging of personality in something
impersonal.
It is more like the fact that when individuality, when personality,
is known and experienced as an expression of the whole cosmos,
then the person becomes more individual, not less individual.
But he becomes individual in a non-striident way in a way that has in it the spirit of
the uncarved block and the unbeached silk.
And so one of the qualities of this is solideriness.
The great Chinese poem which has sabi in it, it preeminently, is asking for the master.
I asked the boy beneath the pines.
He says the master has gone alone, herb gathering somewhere on the Mount,
Cloud hidden, whereabouts unknown.
So all the whole idea you see of Zen, that wherever you stand,
if you realize Zen, you create a mountain.
Everywhere is the mountain solitude, even in the middle of an uproar.
This is sabi.
And for this reason, then an enormous amount of the subject matter
of far Eastern painting in poetry is solitude, in the love of solitude.
Now there is next wabi.
This is a more difficult idea.
That's imagine that you are feeling very bad about something,
you know, depressed.
The world is too much with you just your sick of life.
And then quite surprisingly, you notice a small weed growing underneath a hedge.
And this weed is really after all not just to be dismissed as a weed,
but some rather lovely design that is in the nature of this plant.
Or supposing you are bothered by financial abroad,
wars, politics and everything like that, and you are sitting on the beach
and you become aware of the water endlessly crossing pebbles.
And you get a sense that this goes on forever and ever and ever,
it is long before you were thought of, long before all human history,
empire, schemes, and so on, and will endure long after.
But it's something strikes you that is very simple, very ordinary,
like the water on the pebbles, or like the little weed under the hedge,
that suggests a kind of amazing eternal reliability of nature.
That in the very humble form goes on and on and on and on and on and on and whatever human beings
may do, this everlasting sanity persists.
Now that strange slip from the mood of depression to the mood of a certain consolation
in this weed is wabi.
Now, don't let me be too dictatorial.
I'm trying to explain these things through examples rather than through trying to give you
philosophical definitions.
It's better to give examples than to pin it down with abstract terminologies.
Wabi comes out in the haiku very much, a brush would gate and for a lock this snail.
This is wabi.
This is all there is.
The path comes to an end among the parsley,
which has a touch of you again, but also wabi because the parsley is just,
well, everybody has parsley in the garden.
Now, next, this word awabi, a wabi, is very much connected with the Buddhist feeling
for the transience of life that everything is changed and nothing
at all can be held on to or possessed.
This feeling of transience is at the root of the philosophy of poverty that exists in Buddhism
and it has a curious difference in it from the Christian philosophy of poverty,
as I say explained by some Francis of a CC.
It's cognate to it, it's like it, but a little subtle difference.
Somehow one feels in the Christian emphasis on poverty,
that poverty contrasts with richness as good to evil.
In other words, poverty is unpleasant, but it's something you ought to share with the poor
who live unpleasant lives.
So if you are to expiate your sins, well you ought to be poor.
And to live roughly.
And so if for this reason, in Buddhism one would not say so much poverty as one would say simplicity.
Not going without not clinging to things because it's good for you,
but because it is actually the happiest way to live.
Because nothing is more terrifying than the state of chronic anxiety, which one has,
if you are subject to the illusion that something or other in life could be held on to and safeguard it.
And nothing can.
So the acceptance of everything flowing away is absolutely basic.
To freedom, to being an unsweet, a cloud water person who drifts like cloud and flows like water.
But in this, we mustn't take ourselves too ridiculously.
I mean, naturally all human beings have in them a certain clinging.
See, you can't let go totally, you wouldn't be human if you did.
You can't be just a leaf on the wind, or just a ball in a mountain stream to use a Zen poetic phrase.
Because if you were that, you wouldn't be human.
Just as I pointed out that a person with no emotions who was completely controlled as emotions as a stone Buddha.
So a person who would be completely let go.
Would also be some kind of an inanimate object.
So Zen very definitely emphasizes
being human
being perfectly human as its ideal.
And so to be perfectly human,
one must have not a state of absolute detachment.
But a state of detachment which contains a little bit of resistance.
A certain clinging still, they say in India, of a Jeevan Mukta, a man who is liberated in this world,
that he has to cultivate a few mild bad habits in order to stay in the body.
Because if he were absolutely perfect, he would disappear from manifestation.
And so the yogi, great yogis, maybe he smokes a cigarette, or has a bad temperocation.
It's something that keeps him human.
And that thing little thing is very important.
He is like the salt in a stew.
It's the, it grounds him.
Well, this is another way of saying that even a very great sage, a great Buddha,
will have in him a touch of regret that life is fleeting.
Because if he doesn't have that touch of regret, he's not human,
and he's incapable of compassion towards people who regret very much that life is fleeting.
So the mood I want to, is that touch of regret?
Of nostalgia, of, you know that poem, it speaks of the feeling of a banquet hall deserted.
Here it is, there's been a great banquet, you know, and it's all the guests have gone home.
And there are empty glasses and dirty plates and crush napkins and all sorts of things all over.
And somehow the echo of voices and merriment is still there.
And so this mood, a wari, comes up.
So even a very great person, you know, should feel that,
because the price otherwise is not to be human.
So for this reason, Buddhist and Taoist poetry is not unemotional.
It's not dehumanized, and so somehow speaks very much to us as people,
and does not have in it the feeling that we ought instead to turn into saints or Superman.
That's the humane thing about this philosophy of life.
The next word, the special term, is fool you.
A fool you means literally, wind flow, who is the character for wind, or you means flowing.
And the dictionary is translated elegance, and this won't do.
For you, first of all, you must remember that the character of the word wind is used in Chinese and Japanese alike to indicate atmosphere.
The atmosphere of a place.
So when a person has say a certain school of poetry or philosophy, it's called the family wind,
that means that the atmosphere, the slant, the attitude of this particular school.
So that meaning of wind atmosphere comes into the expression for you.
And for you is like this. Here is a land fishing, and he's sitting in the evening in the twilight on the edge of a river,
and with his fishing rod in a lonely little boat tied up by the bank.
Now if this man is fishing with his mind intent simply on catching fish, this is not for you.
But if he's also digging the atmosphere, it's for you.
To flow with the wind, you see, to dig the atmosphere, American offers them as beautiful
possibilities of translation in our incomparable slang for some oriental ideas.
For you is there to get with it, to flow with it.
And not again, you see, in the sense of the merely passive leaf flowing on the wind.
But for you as in it, you see, a touch of self-consciousness, like that man fishing.
Now, you would think if you studied Darwin's philosophy, that this would be very bad.
And John says somewhere says that a comfortable belt is one that you don't feel, and you're unaware of it.
That's not the most comfortable belt.
Like comfortable shoes would you be completely unconscious if comfortable shoes know
something better than comfortable shoes are shoes that you know are comfortable.
So in the same way, the self-consciousness adds something to life.
It's one thing to be happy and not know it.
It's another thing to be happy and to know it.
It's like one's voice in a shower or more bath tub has more resonance than one's voice in the open air.
And that's why temples and cathedrals and resonating boxes for guitars and drums and things are created
to give this little quality of echo.
For all echo is a certain kind of feedback which enables you to reflect upon what you're doing
and to know that you know.
So one might say that ordinary people are Buddhas, but they don't know it.
And the Buddha is one who knows he's a Buddha.
Only they don't let you settle for this comfortably and easily because really to know is also defined as not to know.
In the Upanishads it is said that if you think that you know what Brahman is,
you have yet some study to be done for those who know Brahman do not know Brahman and those who do not know Brahman really know.
Now all this paradoxical language is intended to keep you confused so that you can't say I've got it.
So, but this position you see is not one sided.
There is something about being human, about being self-conscious, you see.
That is not a mistake of nature, not a completely evil fall into self-awareness.
But self-awareness although it creates all kinds of problems.
Because through self-awareness, human being is in some sense self-frustrating mechanism.
He knows that he's going to die and the price of being able to control the future is to know that
in the long run you won't be able to and worry about that.
But also with self-consciousness goes the possibility of resonance, of realization,
of becoming enlightened, liberated and knowing it and therefore able to enjoy it.
So, for you adds to the dimension of going with it something more than the mere
passivity of going with but knowing the chill going.
Now, but it does at the same time, it isn't entirely wrong that the dictionaries have translated
elegance. It, you could say for you, is style.
When we say somebody really has style. Now, but this designates a particular kind of style.
It is the style of what one might call the elegant poor man, the aristocratic bum, the
rich pauper, you see. Now, you find that a good deal in the things that we've been seeing.
We've gone to many temples where nobody really owns anything and yet in a way they're
luxurious. This is for you.
The next word, you again. If you are why you, for you. I have spoken about you again, but I haven't
told you, the basic symbol of you again is the flower which grows from a rock.
And so, there is something about that which is improbable, mysterious, contradictory,
that a flower could come out of a rock, but you again,
more than any other of these terms defies translation. The two characters, which I shall draw
for you shortly, are rather interesting. One, the first character you
shows the basic form of a mountain. And then the mountain is combined
with characters indicating dark, darkness. You see, in the character of a mountain,
which is simply like this, there are these things here that are the valleys,
and the dark is put in the valley, as in each case. Now, you get so the idea of the deep valley
is a poem which says, the wind drops, but the petals keep falling. The bird calls and the
mountain becomes more mysterious. Little sounds emphasising silence. Little motions emphasising
stillness. This quality, you see, is in this word, you. Again, is in Chinese shuan,
which means the original deep, deep, mysterious darkness out of which everything arises.
The depth, Yakoberma would say, ungrunt, in the book of Genesis, and darkness covered the
face of the deep, or the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. Those waters of chaos,
the prime evil, blackness, which is the same blackness as your head. You know, how your head appears
invisible to your eyes. That is, again, it is darker than darkness, because it isn't,
it is blacker than black. You see, it is practically nothingness. It's so mysterious.
So, when you put these two characters together, you get, you get. And so, you again,
is first of all, a suggestiveness. I was looking round one of the temples a few days ago,
where I noticed that you couldn't figure out how big it was, or it didn't seem to have
any limits, because always, every war will say of a room, seemed to be a screen, which led to
something else beyond. And at the back of every garden, there seemed to be a little gate that led
to some other courtyard, and everything led into something else, and I said to the priest,
I don't know whether I'm going to go exploring or not, or just leave it alone, and think that,
well, here I left Kyoto, and I never did find out what was through that little gate.
And so, what? Or, for ever, there will be magic behind there, which I didn't define,
I didn't draw in. And so, this whole temple was done that way. All sorts of suggestions of
little avenues disappearing, like a mountain path winding up among the trees, where does it go?
True, if you follow it, you'll eventually go up out of Kyoto here and get down to Otso,
and they'll notice you'll find yourself back in the suburbs. But there is the sense that that disappearing
mountain path, like we've got going up here, that it goes to the place, and everybody has in
their back of their minds, an image of the place that you want to go to, or some, and they're not
really an image, though. It's always slightly indefinite. There's the sort and feeling of,
and there ought to be somewhere the thing I've always wanted. We get disappointed, of course,
because as we get older, we feel that perhaps that doesn't exist at all, that one just has to
put up with the second best, or with something half a loaf is better than no bread. But still,
I find that far Eastern art is very, very full of hints about what is sometimes called
Horaisan. Horaisan is the magical island, somewhere out in the Pacific, which is the Paradise Island.
And all these Chinese paintings of wonderful floating pagodas and terraces with
scholars sitting around drinking wine and was on, are hints of the Paradise world.
And that somewhere then, these little steps lead up to that thing.
And you've seen these steps. Japan is full of them, as you just go along in the train, you look up the hills,
and there are arches, turrets, steps disappearing into the hills, all of which suggest the
feelings, I'm not sure, is that thing? So you can, as it were, come round full circle to
Sabi. The wonderful lonely place at the end of the road, where there won't be any mother-in-law
to bother you, any of that sort of dreadful social difficulty. But the solitude which fits,
defeats, a bearded old gentleman. Now, of course, you see all these things are symbols.
On one level, they're very human, and they reflect our perhaps childish and immature desires
to be really alone, to have that paradise thing. And realistic people say, well,
you ought not to bother yourself, or fool yourself with such fantasies. And nowadays, I find that we
feel very guilty about thinking of paradise, of horizon, or whatever it is, the enchanted garden.
I think, no, no, no. Reality is what you read about in the newspapers, and got a face of
and everything is unpleasant basically. I know there's a hard-boiled school of zoologists, for
example, who insist that birds hate flying. Everybody has always ended a bird and wanted to
be able to glide along with wings. And so there comes up somebody who is usually some wretched
academician, who says, no, and we've discovered by measurements that birds loath flying,
I'm new to feel very satisfactory when you found that out because you've smashed an ideal,
over the wings of a dove, far away would I roam, and the wilderness build me a nest,
and remain there forever at rest. I'm quoting these songs. But apparently, a dove still
just hate this chore of flying. Now, it is just in the same way as it's ridiculous to try to be so
inhuman as never to feel any regrets about the passing of time and of life. And so on,
it's likewise inhuman not to have the paradise fantasy. Of the mysterious place around the corner,
just over the crest of the hill, just behind the island in the distance. You see, because that place
is really the big joke. That's you. That's why you have found that at the end of the line,
when you get through the last story and up the last stairway, you're liable to be confronted with a mirror.
And so everybody is seeking, seeking, seeking, seeking, seeking, for that thing that you've got
a half, you see. Well, you got it. But nobody's going to believe this.
But there it is. The real thing that you are is the paradise land that you're looking for
at the end of the line. And it's far, far more reliable than any kind of an external scene
which you could love and cling to and hold on to. Of course, the whole fascination of life
is that that seems perfectly incredible.
So, I think these terms are the crucial ones. Let me repeat them briefly. You've got
the first lay the uncarved block and the unbleached silk. These are the prototypes.
Then you have Sabi, the mood of solatrinus, Wabi, the flip from disillusion with everything to the
sudden recognition of how faithful the weeds are, how the sparrows chirping in the eaves
suddenly take your mind away from important and dreadful business.
A Wari, the regret of the passing of life which somehow makes that very passing
beautiful. For you, getting with it and living with style, that is to say with rich poverty,
elegance, simplicity. You can. The aesthetic equivalent of, well, let me put it this way,
there was a philosopher by the name of Vandaloo who once said that the mystery of life is not a problem
to be solved but a reality to be experienced. That's you can. And that mystery, that deep, deep,
ever-so-deep thing which is before all worlds is you. The unrecognized self.
So, let's have a brief intermission.
