One of the most surprising things that has happened to me in my study of Eastern philosophy
over the years is to find that as I thought I was studying, something that had first
seemed wholly foreign to the Western world. At the same time I discovered all kinds of
relatively new forms of thought and exploration of man's consciousness arising indigently
within the Western world, which in various ways paralleled the approaches of Eastern philosophy
to the problems of human life. Maybe this is related to the curious problem of what
is called simultaneous discovery in science. About which some years ago the British biophysicist
LL White wrote an article in Harper's Magazine. Showing however example, apparently quite
independent investigators in various parts of the world, engaged in scientific research,
hit upon discoveries at the same time. And of course in the scientific world this is
usually explained by reference to what is called the state of the field. In other words,
if in a given field of science say a certain department of physics knowledge has advanced
to a certain state, a certain level and all the workers in this field are familiar with
this knowledge through the journals and other sources of information. Then because they possess
information in common, they are liable to hit upon the next step in several places at once.
And so you get simultaneous discovery of new things. However in some ways the same thing has happened
between East and West. That is to say that at the same time that the West became aware
of oriental culture, it of itself apparently developed forms of thought and forms of insight
very closely paralleling things that had existed long before in the Asian world. And the
interesting thing is that these were in many cases developed by people who had no direct knowledge
or contact with literature about Asia. And in this way there seems to be a dissimilarity between
what has happened in this case and what happens in the sciences.
The apparently anti-metaphysical and even anti-religious trends of what is called scientific
empiricism and sometimes logical positivism. Especially as this movement is represented in the
early work of Ludwig Vittgenstein, the work say that he did about 1914 contains some quite
extraordinary parallels to developments that occurred in Indian philosophy and logic between
Shaui say 2700 AD. And again in an offshoot of these developments in the field of linguistics and I'm
thinking particularly of the semantic philosophy of Kojibski and the metalinguistic thought of
Benjamin Lee Wof. There are even more striking parallels to some of the later developments of
Buddhist philosophy. In other words the insistence on the distinction between the actual physical world
and the forms of words are that is to say of linguistic symbolism, grammar and logic. One must
recognize that these two things are in a way distinct and that you mustn't confuse the order
of words with the order of reality. You must quite keep clear the distinction as Kojibski
used to say between the map and the territory. Well that's one development in the West,
strikingly parallel to ideas that have been strongly influential in the East. The parallel
ways of thinking that exist between a Chinese, Taoist and Neo Confucian philosophy.
And the growth of ideas in modern biology. Joseph Needham has pointed this out of course
in his remarkable history of science and civilization in China. And incidentally he is himself
a biologist before he devoted himself to the study of the history of Chinese science. Before even
he was 30 years old he had made some remarkable discoveries in biology and he has pointed out
that the Taoistic theory of nature and of man is non-mechanistic, non-theistic, but rather
organismic in the same way as the biological theories of people like Kurt Goldstein,
Ludwig von Bertelanfe and Woodger in England and also the man I mentioned a little while ago
the biophysicist LL White. None of these people that I mentioned go Stein, Bertelanfe etc.
and Needham before he began to study Chinese science, none of these people had had any direct contact
with the world of Oriental thought. I think I should probably also include in this list of
people advocating an organismic theory of the world A and Whitehead. So this is a very remarkable
and apparently spontaneous occurrence within the western world of types of thinking
which are parallel to things which we find in Asia. The ones which I have mentioned
are relatively well known, there are others which are less well known and there is a kind of
tradition existing in the West today. It's not very popular tradition because in the nature of
these things they're not easily popularized because they're not easily expressed
in the terms and in the languages of our mass media. But there is a kind of work which I have
come across in the last few years which almost more than the work of the biologist that I've
mentioned resembles a western version of Chinese Taoism. Now before I say anything about it,
I want to stress in what way this kind of thing resembles Chinese Taoism. I've often drawn
attention to a curious distinction between Chinese and typically western attitudes to human nature.
We're real in the West with a rather fundamental mistrust of our own nature.
To use a platonic analogy, we think of man as a sort of rider on a horse, a two-natured
person who has a rational soul in an animal body and the animal body is regarded as something
vital but stupid. In charge of the rational soul whose origins seem to be completely
independent of those of the animal body. And so the whole problem and the task of human life
is to subjugate the animal body to the rational will. And I again have often drawn attention to the
way in which this theory of man has persisted into the whole climate of opinion of modern science.
Even though paradoxically enough, the basic philosophy of modern science,
especially the behavioral sciences, is naturalistic, that is to say, it does not admit of
there being two quite separate worlds, the natural and the supernatural, but one world,
at least ideally, is scribable in one language, simply the world of nature.
Although that has been admitted theoretically in practice, the naturalistic scientists
tends to be a person who doesn't trust the natural order at all, but a person who still carries
over in a sort of unconscious and habitual way. The old Judeo-Christian mistrust of man's
animal nature as a province of the world preempted at any rate temporarily by the devil.
Now, therefore, it is somewhat alien to the West and to Western traditions of thought,
to see any sanity in putting trust in the wisdom of one's own animal nature.
Now, of course, there were tendencies in this direction that arose in the 18th century,
and strengthened in the 19th century, and what we call philosophy of nature and later the romantic
movement in literature. But these are, say, were associated with the work of Russo, for example,
with his philosophy of the noble savage, the idea that man was by nature free and as a result of
the superimpositions of artificial social structures has been found everywhere in chains.
And there are certain elements in this romantic philosophy of nature that nowadays we are
apt to regard as sentimental. But nevertheless, we are, I think, beginning to come to a point of view,
whereby we must recognize that although human nature is not something which, if, as it were,
we're not interfered with would be entirely good, which is, I think, roughly the romantic point of view.
But rather to say something like this, the human nature, as we find it, is an interplay
a balance of good and evil, a positive and negative, and that sanity consists in respecting this balance.
See, this is not a sentimental point of view. It does not ignore the fact, for example,
that we live by destroying other organisms. There is inevitable conflict in life in its natural
state, but that this conflict is something which subserves a higher kind of harmony, and therefore
has to be trusted, or rather has to be supported, accepted and contained, and that sanity consists
fundamentally in this. Now then, on the basis of this sort of attitude to human nature,
there has been developed a kind of movement in the West, it would hardly call it a movement in any
organized sense, but seems to have originated in Germany. Some years ago in Germany, there was a
woman called Elsa Gindler, and she happened to have a serious case of tuberculosis.
Her doctor's told her that, at that time, many years ago, she died at the age of 70 about
two or three years ago, that she was a hopeless case, there was nothing further they could do for
her, and that she may as well get ready for the end. She therefore betook herself, I think,
to the black forest, and found herself quite a little hut where she could live in the forest alone.
And she said, if this disease came by itself, it can go by itself, and she decided to make
an experiment that she would become as vividly aware as she could of all the subtle motions
that were going on inside her body, all the subtle little feelings that she had, and she would
respond to them. And so, in the quiet of the forest, she became silent and very, very responsive
to everything that was going on within her, in the kind of inner life of her organism. And by
doing this, after about a year at past, she found herself recovered from the disease. And this
so fascinated her that she explored further the promptings of her own nature and explored ways
of teaching it to other people and eventually developed a kind of system of instructing others
in this art. But nobody was ever able to think up a kind of label or name for what this art is.
Of course, a Chinese would say this is the art of Taoism. This is the art that is called in Chinese
Wu Wei or non-interference with the Tao that is to say with the course of nature.
But you see, in describing the way that El Zagindla went about this, you can see at once that
non-interference is a highly difficult thing, requiring a great deal of intelligence.
Because you have to be patient, you have to be intelligent, you have to be sensitive
in order to respond to these subtle promptings of the organism itself.
A number of people who were students of El Zagindla came to the United States and have
various different ways in accordance with their own particular personalities and
approaches and styles, shall we say, have taught this kind of method, I think, particularly for example
Charlotte Selva, who works in New York, who also was a student of El Zagindla.
I've been looking at an article she wrote some time ago in the bulletin of the general
semantics people in which she describes this kind of work. It's so fascinating because
the work of this kind is scapes all classification, which is in itself a mark of some kind of
distinction, so everything in this world has to be classified. People want to label you, they want
to say, oh, you're a Catholic or you're a Republican or you're a Buddhist or you're a bitnic
or you're a zenist or you're a psychoanalyst or whatever it may be because they feel that when
they can put a label on you, they sort of dismissed you, they know where you are, they know what
pigeonhole you're in and you can't cause them any trouble. And therefore one can be deeply and
creatively troubled by some kind of work or you can't quite call it philosophy, which is impossible
to pin down. I've been familiar with Charlotte Selva's particular interpretation of El Zagindla's
idea for some years and in being asked often to explain it I've been completely dumbfounded to do so
in just a short phrase. It isn't physical education, it isn't rhythmic studies, it isn't dance,
it isn't relaxation, it isn't body culture or anything of that kind. It's a fascinating experiment
in simply becoming ever more aware of one's physical organism and learning to trust it
and learning to become in a chord consciously with what it wants to do
and that wish or that want is ordinarily unconscious. And therefore it's something that's very
difficult to explain without actually participating in it without doing it but still it's always been
one of my particular attempts or efforts to describe the indescribable. Anybody who works with
words poet author and so on is really trying to describe the indescribable. This is the whole
lot of speech and literature. That's how I might introduce this by a story which Charlotte Selva once told
me about herself and her study with El Zagindla. One of the things that El Zagindla tried sometimes
to get her students to do was to make a drawing of the way in which one feels one's own body
and when Charlotte first went to study with her she was full of all kinds of funny ideas and
when she was asked to draw how she feels. She made a grand drawing of everything about
herself that she knew intellectually you see that she had all her bones and muscles and everything
we put there in the right position. For several people in the class and when all the drawings were put
up along the wall, Charlotte Selva was astonished to see that none of the other drawings looked in
the least bit like her own. They were all kinds of funny lines and blotches and gloves and indeed
one of them was simply a blank piece of paper with a small black spot on it and she said that
El Zagindla walked along the drawings making various comments about them and when she came to
the one with a black spot she said oh I see you still have that tension in your left hip
and Charlotte was expecting you see that at the time El Zagindla arrived at her she would
compliment her on what a really sensitive drawing she had done of her own body but when she finally
approached that drawing she said nothing and passed right on and that was a great moment that was
one of those moments of truth in life those moments of conversion when one finds out the difference
between what you think you feel and what you really feel. One of the things most strongly emphasized
in this work is that we're all brought up to try and conform ourselves to fixed patterns
of what a human being ought to be. This happens in very many different ways but one of the ways in
which it happens is how we ought to move and hold ourselves physically. We talk about postures
what is the right way to sit the right way to stand the right way to use one's hands and so on and so
forth and of course it doesn't strike us that all these things are very stylized and if they don't
correspond in any way with what our physical organism actually wants to do the adoption of these stylized
pastures is going to cause conflict between what we try to be and what we are and since what we try
to be has really no special virtue about it a lot of the pastures that we adopt have no particular
sense to them at all their sort of social rituals. I want to quote from Charlotte Selvers article
in the general semantics bulletin a little story. She says the other day I visited some friends
among the guests there was a couple with their daughter a little girl of eight a thoughtful and very
graceful child. While we were talking the little girl played in the garden I had the pleasure of
watching her through the window then she came upstairs and sat down one leg hanging down the other
one on the couch mother said but Helen how do you sit take your leg off the couch a girl never should
sit like that little girl took her leg down on which occasion her skirt flew high above her knees
the mother Helen pull your skirt down one can see everything the child blushed
looked down on herself and pulled her skirt down but asked why what is wrong
the mother looked at her quite shocked and said one doesn't do that by this time the atmosphere in
the room was completely uncomfortable the little girl not only had her legs down but had them pressed
against each other her shoulders had gone up and she held her arms tight against her little body
this went on until she couldn't stand it any longer she suddenly stretched herself and yorned
heartily again a storm of indignation from her mother by now this all lasted about 10 minutes the child
had changed completely her gracefulness had turned into awkwardness all her motions were stilled
her little body was tense she hardly seemed to be alive anymore what will happen to this child
she will hold her unhappy pose for a few minutes before she shakes it off
the next time her mother will administer she will hold it a few minutes longer and so on each time
a little longer until it last she will have repressed her naturalness so deeply that she will have
forgotten it the mother will then have reached her goal she will have educated her to be
socially acceptable as a human being the child will be greatly inhibited because as the mother will
chain her in this direction she will chain her in a thousand other directions end of quote
and so you see it isn't simply in the social conditioning of the child is not simply a matter
of training children in the fundamental conventions of moral behaviour which perhaps are artificial
but certainly are necessary for some sort of social cohesion and agreement but the training of
children in all kinds of weird symbolic attitudes which are held to be proper and nice and
ritualistically decent which produces in all of us a state of chronic psychophysical strain and
discomfort which after a while becomes unconscious we failed to notice it but it underlies our
ulcers and our irritations and our frustrations which eventually build up into a vast and appalling
political idiosers it's very difficult to get people to recover from this because you see
in trying to come back to themselves to come back to a unity and harmony with their own organisms
they still have the cast of mind the tendency to look to authority of some kind to tell them what they
ought to be and Charlotte Selver has often told me that people who come to work with her
expect to be told what kind of physical posture what kind of physical feelings they ought to have
she says they they want to know how to move how to stand how to sit or in order to be exercised
they're quite astonished at first when they're invited to become more restful to give up the
doing so that they can listen better to what their body has to tell them we need quite for self-experience
quiet and awakeness we need permissiveness too to all the subtle changes which may be needed
but we ask we ask therefore what can one feel of one's own organism what of happenings within
not what one knows of one's body or what one thinks about it or believe somebody else expects one
to feel of it but what one actually senses no matter what comes to the fore but this is difficult
of course because we expect that we are supposed to conform to a pattern and that there is somebody
who knows what we ideally ought to be ought to feel and this despite this is the curious thing
this is the paradox this despite all the emphasis in the western world on the value of individuality
the value of personal uniquenesses and the differences between man and man
isn't it strange that to fulfill this great ideal this democratic personalistic ideal of the western
world it seems to be very necessary for us to learn from the East and from things like the East
to learn from the very great differences which exist between one individual physical organism and another
to trust what shall at silver and else a ginder used to call one's own inner
this is I suppose the most difficult thing to explain in words because when we just think about it theoretically
all kinds of objections come up to it and we think that there can only be sanity only order in
society by holding a club over ourselves as if we were naturally organically and physically little monsters
really there is no monstrousness in nature like the monstrousness of man we talk about
the violent life of the ocean's depths of the way the fishes eat each other and live into petrol
conflict at least the fishes stay in the ocean and don't come up and attack the birds and the
mammals and the people on the dry land but nobody is safe from man radioactive fish in the Pacific
birds they wielded by turmoil in the skies insects ravaged and upset in their balances
this is not a condemnation of human intelligence but an appeal to human intelligence
to be both intelligent and sensitive to be temporarily at least silent before the subtle movements
of nature to study them better and to work with the grain of the world instead of against it
you
