One of the things that is a really interesting problem is just why Zen has become so
fascinating to many people in the West, because as you find Zen in Japan today, it's a
pretty tough scene. There are very few Japanese interested in it. The monastery of
Mio Shinji in Kyoto was built to accommodate 600 monks. There are now 30.
For example, I wanted to have a conversation with a learned priest of the Shingon sect.
And to interpreters, his wife, who speaks very good English, and the interpreter we had for our
group. And as we got into things, they started to say, sorry, but this is impossible to translate into
English. We don't know what it means. So I said, all right, let's get some paper.
And when any word arose that they didn't understand, I had him write it in Chinese characters,
which I can more or less read. And so we managed to converse in this very strange round about
all the syntax being conveyed by the interpreters and the actual terms being written.
But that shows you, you see that the quite intelligent people, but the interpreter was a very
intelligent man, and the priest's wife were very well educated woman, but they don't know what it's all about.
So, how come, then, you see, this fascination in the West? Well, it's due very largely
to the way in which certain people have presented Zen to the West, notably Suzuki, and R.H.
Blive. They have made a great use of the Zen story, or the anecdotes.
There is a book of Zen anecdotes. These conversations between the masters and their students,
they're called Mundo, or question answer. There is a book which is called the Muman Khan,
and it's just a collection of stories. And I remember a friend of mine in England when this was first in circulation,
getting this book when he was in hospital, and he said, I don't understand it at all, but it's shared me up immensely.
So, the typical sort of Zen story where a student asks the teacher a question, what is the fundamental meaning of Buddhism?
And the master says, wait around until there's no one here, and I'll tell you.
So, later the student says to him, now there's nobody around Master, what is it? And he takes him out into the garden,
and he points at the bamboo's, and the student says, I don't understand. The master says, what a long bamboo that one is,
what a short one that one is. Period. It has a kind of a shaggy dog feeling. It has a,
it just leaves you wondering, well, what's this meant to convey? And the answer, of course, is that Suzuki explains most carefully,
it's not a symbolical tale. In other words, you're not supposed to understand that bamboo's symbolize something.
In the way that, for example, the parables in the New Testament are symbolical tales. It's not like that at all.
All these Zen Mondo are absolutely clear. There is no conceal symbolism except in very rare incidents,
and then the symbolic element is subordinate. Always the answer is completely straight.
For example, there is a famous coin where the answer to the question, what is the fundamental meaning of Buddhism,
is the second son of the show family and the third son of the co-family, something like that.
And once a student gave an answer to this, co-ung, and the teacher accepted it. But the teachers,
chief student who was standing by at the time, said when the other student had gone away, he said,
I think you should test him on this. And I don't think he really understands. So he called him back
the next day and said, uh, gave him this coin again, and he gave the same answer as he gave before.
And the teacher said, no, no, that won't do it all. But he said, Master, you accepted this answer yesterday.
But the Master replied, yesterday it was yes, but today it is no.
When another, when we had a talk with one of the great roachies in Japan on our last visit,
we were discussing the translation of Zen texts into English. And there's quite a work going on in that way.
But he said, it's not necessary. If you understand Zen, you can use any book to teach it with,
you could use the Bible, you could use Alice in Wonderland. After all, he said, the sound of the
rain needs no translation. And this is a very, very straight story. This is saying exactly what
it's about in the plainest language. Only people overlook it. You know, when something's right
under your nose and you can't see it, and you go looking over there, there, there, there, there, there,
there, and you're carrying, you see, it's like that. And so Suzuki has explained that that's the
way it is. That once when Saburo Hasagawa, who was a great Japanese painter, was at a dinner party
here in San Francisco, somebody asked him, what about understanding Zen? How long does it take?
He said, it might take you 30 years. It might take you three minutes. I mean that.
So you see the element of fascination, that it's right under your nose. You're looking right at it,
you see. It's like, you do get sort of strangely puzzled when you've lost something.
And somebody is kidding you. They're not pointing it out to you, but they why don't you see it?
It's right there. And you can't for the life of you. I mean, it's far more interesting.
That sort of situation than something that's really difficult to find. I mean,
where you'd have to go digging under the flaws, I mean, if a treasure were concealed in the walls
of this very boat, you know, would have to go digging through the walls and looking with all sorts of
things. But here is the treasure concealed in full view and concealed by being in full view,
but in the place that's too obvious to look. So that's the flavor of Zen. And that's why
it's become so fascinating. Also, there are other elements in it that it has a humour to it,
which is peculiarly Chinese. I don't think the Japanese have quite the humour in their Zen that
the Chinese had. And because you see this humour comes from Taoism, to say the writings of
Johansson, who was the great Taoist philosopher who lived shortly after 300 BC,
he's the only really great humourist philosopher. And that flavor has passed on in to Zen.
And also Zen is something experiential. You're not required to believe in anything.
The doesn't have any doctrines. It's entirely consists in a state of consciousness.
A awakened consciousness. So as if I were to say to you, you were if you were puzzled about some,
you know, you were what Tilly calls concerned about being.
What is this thing, life? Why are we here? Why is it suffering? Why do all these creatures
multiply in different ways and shapes? Why are the ducks, why are the trees, why are the snails,
clams, people, or that? For heaven's sake, why? And why do they come and go and what happens to them
when they go? We all want to know that. So that's the kind of concern. As Zen answers this,
not with an idea, but with the change state of consciousness. And you never know whether you can
get that change state of consciousness instantly, right now without further ado, or whether you
have to work for it many, long years. There was an American student of Zen,
who went to Japan on a full bright. And he started and started, he practiced his meditations
and sat in the meditation posture with all the other monks. And the, of course, part of the
technique is to work up a state of intense doubt puzzling about what is it. And what's this?
What is it? What is existence? What is isness? Well, he worked and worked and worked at it
and nothing happened. And the time for his stay was very close to the end and he couldn't get a
renewal of the ground and he had to go back to the United States. And he thought, this is absolutely
terrible. I won't get it. I won't get the Satori, the awakened inside. So he went to the master
and said, look, this is desperate. You've got to help me. The master said, now look, what you've
got to do is now go into what's called session. Session means study of the mind, but it means
prolonged meditation where you hardly even sleep. This is really get to work on it. You come and see
me four times a day and see if you can answer your call and I'll help you. So he worked, he worked,
he worked and he sat there and nothing happened. Nothing happened. Until almost the day he had to leave
when suddenly he saw that there was nothing to realize. And then he had it. You see, Zen works on this
principle and it's called using an empty fist to deceive a child. You know when you say now
to a child, what have I got here? And the child is all interest. What is in there? And you hide
your hand this way that way and so on. And the child is fantastically interested. And then finally
there's nothing. So in the same way, you can get a problem about life, which is a closed fist.
What is it all about? It's like asking, what's the pit in the middle of an onion?
And you take off all the skins and so on and suddenly you find you got a little bit of skins and
no pit. There wasn't anything in it. When you might say, well, it's a hoax. The life is a deception.
A tale told by an idiot. And yet, what you had missed in looking for the pit were the beautiful
skins. See, that's the edible part of the onion. Whereas you may peel a potato,
the onion is all skin, but excellent. Now what one has done under these circumstances is you have
missed the point by being too eager. You were there for overlooked what was obvious.
And so problems are made about the nature of the universe by asking the wrong questions.
May I repeat that there are four great philosophical questions. And in a way, there are all of them
mistaken, but there are the questions that people have asked through all history about the world. One, who started it?
Two, are we going to make it? Three, where are we going to put it? And four, who's going to clean up?
Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Descartes, all discussing these four questions. Now you see, but if you
begin at the beginning, who started it? That's a misleading question. Nobody did. It was always here.
You know, it is what there is. And you've had it, man. But if you get on to that, you know,
what do you see, when the sun kind of a shenanigans going on, the police come by, they want to
know who started it? They're looking for a ringleader because they want someone to blame.
Society requires that somebody should be blamed. So what we do is, from childhood or human beings
get together, and they make up the idea that you started it. Only it's no fun if we know immediately
who started it. It has to be sort of concealed. So people tell lies and cover up and so on.
So we want to know who's good guys and who the bad guys. Really there aren't any differences.
We are all collectively doing what we are doing. And because one person is, as we know, say
a criminal, it has to do with his parents and his environment and so on. But that mustn't be admitted.
Because we wouldn't know how to deal with all of us. See, if the thing that's that's the matter
with human beings is all human beings, in addition to their environment and their fishes and the birds
and everything it all goes together. It's absolutely interconnected. But so, but that's no fun,
you see? So we break, we pretend that it's all broken up into bits and that one starts it and so on.
So once you've done that, once you've broken it all up into bits and now you start playing
cops and robbers, then you have problems. And it may be fun to have problems. It's perfectly all right to
have problems. Because that's the interest of things. We make life interesting by making it difficult
and sometimes we overdo it. And then it gets desperate and then people begin to ask,
well, what's it all about? Why are we doing this? And then you have to go to a Zenmaster or somebody
like that to be cured of your illusions. And the way he does it, you see, is to make you ask intensely.
What is it? What is the sound of one hand? Listen, really listen. What is the sound of one hand?
What is that? See, when somebody asks a Zenmaster, what is the fundamental meaning of Buddhism?
He said the Cyprus tree in the yard. All right, go out there and look at it.
Or just the sound, move. The great master Joshua was asked, does a dog have Buddha nature?
And he said, no, move in Chinese. Well, everybody knows if they started any Mahayana Buddhism.
There's not only who dogs have in them Buddha nature, which means the capacity to become a Buddha
and awakened one, or you could say it means Buddha nature could roughly mean the divine
center. So why did the master say no? So what they do is this. They work on the word no.
And sometimes the master's teach them to say no, really. Now he says, say no, shout it
and the student's shout. And the teacher says, ah, you didn't really mean it, try a game.
And so he gets to yelling, no, you see, no, no, no, he and the teacher says no, this is not good enough.
Get behind it, get with it. And the student gets so frustrated. He suddenly realizes he can't say no.
Well, now you know a little bit about this, supposing you take the word no. And you say it many times.
No, no, no, no, no. And it becomes funny. You wonder, isn't it strange that this funny sound
no, which makes you itch a little bit on the tip of your nose? Means no. Well, what does no mean?
What does it mean that you know what I mean when I say no? See, I mean no means I won't.
I don't want any dinner or something. I won't play with you. But take the situation of a
person making this exchange with another. See, we know the meaning of the word no,
but what does it mean that we are able to have this exchange of meaning, this communication? Does that
mean anything? Well, in a way it doesn't. You can come and sit over here, there's plenty of room.
Yeah. What that is, you see, the fact that we as human beings communicate,
that we say how do you do in the morning and goodbye at night, that we eat, that we have children,
and they all put in little boxes, and they, you know, become doctors and lawyers and business
executives. And they do this and they do that. It's just like the trees go up and they do this
and they wave in the wind and the birds flap around and they eat things. And that makes bird,
there's all the food you eat, flows into your shape just like a flowing stream, has a whirlpool in it.
And it keeps the whirlpool there, but the whirlpool is never the same water, it goes on and on. So
in just the same way, all these creatures are a kind of a tide of food and it goes in and it does
that creature and it flaps around and then it goes out again. So what's all that about?
In the Buddhist philosophy, that all that is called vusness, it's like that.
Like, did you ever see a lady go this way, go that way? And so a Buddha is called in Sanskrit
at Tathagata, which means one who comes or goes thus. This is very simple, that's what it's doing
and things are doing that. Only to make a kind of game of it, we put valuations on it.
It's like poker, you get chips. How much of the chips worth? Well, they're worth anything you
want to say they're worth. So in the same way, all this is going on and you say, well, what is
important? Is there something important here? Well, yes, we say there are certain things that are
more important than others. We've agreed among ourselves because we are people that we are
more important than sea girls. And the sea girls have agreed among themselves that they're
more important than people. And they recognize their kind and they pick out in life all the
things that are significant to their needs as we pick out the things that are significant to
our needs. We say now that's the thing that really must happen. But actually nothing must happen.
It just happens. And that's called vassness or suchness. And so the Zen is concerned
that the whole nature of Zen is to get you back to seeing the suchness of things.
It's a process of unhypnotizing. You see, when you hypnotize people by making them pay attention.
So I want you to look very closely at my finger. I want you to relax completely and pay attention
only to this finger. And there are many other ways of doing it. You hypnotize people much better
by not letting them know that's what you're doing. And all showbiz and teaching and so on,
there's hypnosis. But your parents began to hypnotize you or the moment you were born.
Because they told you what was important to look at. You know, a baby looks at everything.
A baby is interested in just anything around. I mean children sometimes point out things
for which we have no words. They say, what's that? You say, what do you mean? Well, don't you see that?
Well, not good, perfectly clear. I'm that. What's the word for that? You suddenly realize
that they are pointing out a configuration of patterns on something that we don't have a word for.
I mean, we, for example, we don't have a single word in English for dry space.
We don't have a word for most kinds of smell. For example, the smell of cheap perfume,
like Benher, or that sort of very metallic crude kind of perfume. We don't have any word
that describes that specific quality of smell. Because we haven't thought it significant very
much about it about our noses. But little children smell everything. They look into everything.
They sack their toes. They explore their whole bodies. Everything all around.
And they're fascinating. But they add out say, now now don't touch this, do touch that. Look at
this. Don't bother about that because they're teaching them the human game and what is significant
and what is not. Now, when you see, you have picked out things in the world that are the important
things, the significant things. In other words, the things, if thing is a name for something you think about.
All things are units of thought. Like an inch is a unit of measurement or an ounce is a unit of weight.
A thing is a unit of thought. It's a think. And so when you say you can only think of one thing at a time,
you can only think one thing at a time. That's what it's saying. Because actually you say you think of a thing
of the tape recorder. How many things is the tape recorder? You know, it's a massive stuff.
A human body likewise. But when that predicament is foisted on you and you have divided life
into all these things, then you're under the delusion that the world is all separated and
distorted. And that you are only something in the world. You forget by doing that, that you are
that your physical organism, let me put it this way, is something that the whole
cosmos is doing. The real you is all that there is. The whole works. There is no real separation.
I mean, when I say there is no separation, don't imagine that I'm saying that there aren't any
skins, there aren't any outlines, there aren't any surfaces or lines. Yes, of course there are.
But the basic lesson in metaphysics is that for every inside there is an outside. That's really all you need to know.
Once you really understand that, you've mastered all philosophy. That the inside and the outside go together,
in other words. People think that I'm in the inside and you're on the outside. But where would
my inside be without the outside? See, imagine a bottle which has an inside but no outside.
It won't work. There's no such thing. Imagine an object. It was no external space
rounded. It couldn't exist. So the space and the object go together, just in the same way as
your front and your back go together. And that's it. You see, we're taught by pointing out what
things are important and what are not to ignore that. So ignoring it is in Sanskrit, ignorance,
avidya and the Buddhist say, avidya is the beginning of the trouble. You just ignore how the inside
and the outside go together. So the work of Zen is to get people unhypnotized by this sort of thing.
Back to the point where they started in babyhood, but they never cultivated it because they were
developed along other lines. Two, it's called to regain one's original pressure that you receive
from your father and mother. Or what is sometimes called to get the unborn mind? That's a curious phrase,
the mind that didn't arise. That is to say, what you are fundamentally, as distinct from what you
pop up and declare yourself to be. Imagine, for example, a big sigh with many tits on it,
all these are passages to a central source of milk. And so they unite together under the surface.
Well, in the same sort of a way, you see, we're all united like that. We are channels
through which it is happening. Only, we are sensitive only on the tip of the nipple.
We're all our concentration is there at that point. And so we've lost the realization of being the whole thing
that happened very, very early in our infancy. Now, when you get it back,
you don't become incapacitated. In other words, it isn't as if you lost the sensation
and the comprehension of what we call the different things and events in the world, their names,
their places, all that sort of practical knowledge. The knowledge, in other words, that is
helpful for survival, you don't lose that. But you see all these separate things and people and events
in a new context. You might say against a new background,
in which you see that they're all one. Or if I'm going to get very, very technical as the Indian
logicians like to, he would say they are non-dual. Because the word one is still a dual word,
it has an opposite. One is opposed to many or to none. Whereas this whatever it is
that we are all on doesn't have an opposite because it's everything. So the word one isn't
quite the right word for it. So they use the word non-dual, which is a kind of a fancy word.
They use it. I mean non-dual is, of course, the opposite of dual. But they have a convention
about it. Imagine when you draw on a flat surface and you want to represent the third dimension
of depth. You do it. Still using lines on the flat surface. But by a convention that we all agree
on, certain slanting lines indicate this dimension. And we all know that. So in the same way
in Indian philosophy, certain words are used. To designate a dimension, not in our ordinary
way of thinking. Our ordinary way of thinking is either this or that, we think in dualities.
And that may have something to do with the fact that our brain has two sides and we have two eyes,
two ears and so on, two nostrils. This and the way our ribs are formed, growing out of the spine
and two legs and two arms. Probably that structure is connected with the way we think.
Either this or that. We do have what's in the left hand or we do have what's in the right.
And so we can't talk about, we can't say anything sensible about everything, about the universe.
Because we can't find something that's not the universe, you see.
So then what we do is we take a dualistic word and say, it is to be understood that this word refers
to what is beyond all dualistic ideas. So you look at it this way.
In order to make a word mean something, I have to be able to say what is excluded from the
meaning of this word. It's like a box. If the box is there, there must be what's inside the
box and there must be what's outside the box. Now I want to talk to you about a box.
Which is the ultimate box. The class of all classes is the addition to say and there isn't anything
outside it. Everything is in this box. Well, a logician would say that's observed. There could be no
such box. It wouldn't be a box unless you can show me that it has an outside. I'm sorry.
Well, I'm going to get clever with this fellow. I'm going to say, yeah, my box has an outside.
And the outside and the inside, however, go together. Actually, the box I have here
is constructed in a peculiar way. You know what a mobius strip is, don't you? You take a strip of paper,
you twist it once and you join the two ends to have a continuous strip. Now this has a
very strange property. It has only one side and only one edge. You can hold that strip of paper
between your fingers and say, well, look here, I've got one finger on one side and one on the other.
It obviously has two sides. I say, wait a minute. Take a pencil, a bright red pencil and run it
along that so-called one side that you think you have there and keep going. And you will find
when you have followed the pencil back to the place where you started, that you never took it off
the paper to go around the other side. In the same way, you run your finger along one edge
of it and you keep running and you'll get back to the point where you started from and you will
have covered the whole thing both sides, both edges. Now just put that now into three dimensions instead
of two and you have what's called a climb bottle. If you, I think somewhere around the house,
I'll dig it out. We have the life magazine book on mathematics and it has a beautiful drawing
of a climb bottle in it. That has the same property in three dimensions. Now imagine a world which
has the same property in four dimensions and you've got something like what our universe is.
It's outside as the same as it's inside. Crazy. But you see it's difficult to talk about that in the kind of
language that we have. That's in the same way. Mathematicians, especially in mathematics,
applied in physics, have ideas which they can express in their formulae, but which they can't
talk. They can't tell the layman about it because in order to instruct the layman as to the
meaning of these concepts, they have to put them into our ordinary three-dimensional sensory images
and they always distorted. So you see the view. That's why it said that Zen cannot be explained in words.
Although it is in a way explained very clearly in words in all these little stories.
Nevertheless, these stories are not intelligible until you have what I can only call a new
dimension of consciousness. You see, a lot of people don't really have depth deception.
They would look at the moon and see it as a disk. They don't see a ball. The same way a lot of
people are turned there. They hear noises but never hear tunes. It's something like that. Suddenly
one day you say good heavens, the moon's a ball. Or you suddenly become alive to what it is that
people dig in music. Well, in just that sort of way, you can become suddenly alive
to the artist call it the oneness of everything that's going on. And you see that that's all you
and you are eternal. You're what there is. And there's nothing to be afraid of
because we're coming and going we go through a whole spectrum of feelings from the most
rapturous pleasures to the most ghastly agonist. And it's all as in substantial as weaving smoke
and just go, just get with it and go. And then you have the basic understanding of Zen.
Now, all that I've said thus far is simple introduction to what Zen is about.
This way of understanding things arose independently in both India and China. In India,
in what we call the tradition of the Upanishads in Vedanta and yoga and so on,
then in Buddhism, in China, in the form of Taoism. And they reached each other eventually.
And the confluence of the Buddhist and the Taoist traditions came to be Zen.
And this, the formation of Zen really began in about 415 AD in China with the students
of a great Hindu monk, Kumara Jiva. And in the following 200 years, 300 years,
it slowly took form and took form until a very remarkable man by the name of Quenan,
HUI, any NG who died in 713 AD was the man who put it on the map, who, as it were,
brought all the threads together.
And could be called the real founder of Chinese Zen. Now, we are going through in the course of
this seminar, we are going to look at the work of Quenan. But I want first, before we
look at him to look at some of the earlier people, especially Sanchan. Sanchan was a couple of
generations before Quenan spiritual generations, that is master people, master people,
who wrote the most Sanch summary of Zen that exists, which is called the Shinshin Ming,
that is to say the treatise on trusts in the mind, mind with a capital M, which means many things.
Mind is used in Zen, they use the word Shin. And when a Chinese says Shin, he points here,
who call it in Japanese, the hot mind, the psychic center of gravity. But it means mind in a
much wider sense than that. It means mind in the sense of, do you mind? Mind out.
And it also means mind in the sense of space. Everything that we see is on the mind,
like the sound of the radio is on the diaphragm of the loudspeaker.
So it's a very wide sense of the word. Well, let's have an intermission now.
This morning, I simply tried to give you a general survey of what Zen is about
by way of being an introduction. And I was discussing the peculiar reasons for the interest in Zen and the West.
Stressing the extraordinary way in which the sort of now you see it, now you don't
implication of Zen literature has fired people's imagination curiosity that the feeling
there is a new vision of the world in the aspect of its unity as distinct from our ordinary
vision of the world, in the aspect of its multiplicity and broken upness, fallen apartness.
And this is something that you might somehow suddenly catch at any minute.
It isn't that Zen is an easy thing, or that it's a difficult thing. It might be either.
And it exercises this peculiar fascination by saying that the vision of the world in its unity
is terribly obvious. It's right under your nose, only you're looking too hard in the wrong place,
so you don't see it. And so this is always the same puzzle as if I said to you,
if you came here, you know, and said, well, we want some philosophical enlightenment or whatever,
and I looked at you in a funny way and said, but you forgot something.
You know, I was, if you hadn't got your pants on or something, what have you forgotten?
You know, who do you think you are anyhow?
Well, you say, I'm, I'm just me.
Oh, now come on. Don't give me that line.
What would you mean? I'm just poor little me.
Oh, nuts. Don't put on that act. And essentially, you see, it's that kind of Upaia,
which is in teacher uses. Upaia is a Sanskrit word meaning
pedagogical techniques in spiritual disciplines. In politics, it means cunning,
but in the vocabulary of Buddhism or Hinduism, it means the expert cunning,
used by a teacher to surprise and trick his students out of their ego's interest in it.
And then, therefore, in all these co-ons, dialogues, roughsars and practices, and so on,
it's all Upaia. It's a colossal hoax, but a very beneficent one.
So, now, true Zen came to birth in China, as a result of a sort of interplay between Buddhism and
Taoism. Now Taoism is a kind of exists in a sort of contract-puntal relationship to Confucianism.
Confucianism is the philosophy of social order, and it is very literary kind of attitude to life.
Confucianism centers around the idea that sanity is grounded in words,
numbers, and ritual. You might say Confucianism is a social ritual rather than a religion.
It's based on the idea that you've got to find the right names for things, and it's terribly
important to name things properly, exactness of languages is critical. And so, also music
has to be just right. So Confucianism makes for a very high order of civilized conventional living.
Not I might say in passing without a certain humour. Their humour is all through the Chinese nature.
Confucius was a profound dehumorous man, but in a very cool way, he didn't have drums as
belly-love. But you see, basic Confucianism is the idea of what is called yarn.
This is Romanized J.E.N., but it's this character in Chinese. And it means
human-heartedness to be a reasonable person is the highest of all virtues. And that
really it means it involves, for example, the ability to come off it, to avoid fanaticism,
to accept the fact that all human beings are good-bad, that we all have in ourselves an element
of the rascal. And that you should simply get along by recognizing that, so that if somebody picks
a fight with you, you work out a compromise. You realize that he picked a fight simply because he
had emotions and he was human and he was greedy or whatever it is. And so are you. And so you work
out a compromise. And the Confucian would say that the human being as he is both bad and good
is more trustworthy and reliable than a person who pretends that he's not like that. A person who
pretends that he is good and moral and in all things some model of integrity is a very dangerous
man. Confucius said the goody goodies are the thieves of virtue. So, yarn is the Confucian norm.
But then they like to be the live a very artificial style of life with a great deal of formality,
and good manners, and propriety, and Confucians are rather much curators when it comes to sex.
On the other hand, the Taoists represent the opposite pole. They make fun of all attempts to pin things
down in words because they say with what words will you define the right words and with what
words will you define those? They know that a dictionary is circular. Have you ever played a game called
Vish, short for Vish as circle? What you do is this? You have a number of people sitting around
a table, each one with a standard college dictionary, and there's a referee. And at the word go,
a certain word is given. And everybody looks up that word. Then they look up the key word in the
definition of that word. And then they look up the key word in the definition of that word,
and so on. When they get round to the start word again, they call out Vish. The person who calls
out Vish first is the winner of the game. But the referee is to decide whether you played fair.
You know, whether you really look up a significant word in each clause, and you have to
have a pad to keep a record of your steps towards you looked up. So if anyone challenges you,
the referee can judge. So Taoism is the force in Chinese culture, which represents disillusion
with the social game. You see Lao Cao himself by legend, who is supposed to have lived around
600 BC to be a contemporary of Confucius, but probably lived rather later than that. He was supposed
to be the court librarian, and who became absolutely sick of the intrigue and the flattery and
the insincerity of court life. And decided to quit, and just go off by himself on a hike in
the mountains. But he was stopped at the gate by the captain of a guard who said, Sir, we can't let
you go unless you first leave behind a compendium of your wisdom. So he's supposed to have sat down
in the court in the gatehouse, and written the stances of the Dalai Jing translated over 70 times
into English alone. And then the guard let him go, and he disappeared into the mountains.
So the idea of, to put it very boldly, the idea of Confucianism is that all details of living
should be done in a state of highly controlled consciousness and should be just so exactly
right according to the rules. The counter idea of Taoism is that it's better to let everything
happen by itself. Trust your impulses, trust your instincts, trust your natural urges,
let go of it all. Now these two ways of describing Confucianism and Taoism are exaggerated. I am
caricaturing them for the sake of contrast. For example, a Taoist is not really a person who believes
in pure laissez-faire. What he is trying to say, the principle in Taoism called Wu Wei, which means
non-interference, or non-aggression, non-assertion. He's saying, don't act against the grain of things,
act with it. Wu Wei is applied in judo. Now judo is as you know, a highly effect
of form of interfering with things. But it does it on the principle of going with the grain.
In other words, if in judo, there is a form of judo, which is called Juno Kata, and it slow
motion judo to demonstrate the principles. And in one of these Juno Kata exercises, there is the
always the attacker and the defender. And the attacker begins by going at you like this.
See, and this is the lead. Now what does the defender do? Instead of
hitting back at that lead, he does this. He takes the hand of the attacker and pulls it off like this.
Then he catches the other hand and bends the fellow across him. He's calling.
In another one, the attacker does this.
Going to the jaw. The defender catches this up swinging hand.
Like this, carries it right arm, 12's the fellow round, and locks his arm thus.
The attacker is now bending backwards like this, but he's facing this way. And his
right arm is thus caught. See, these are the formal exercises which demonstrate the principles.
The principle of judo is overcoming nature by cooperating. Same way as a sailor tax against the
wind. So you see, it isn't quite not doing anything. It's as we say striking wildly iron is
heart taking time by the forelock, et cetera, et cetera. There is a tide in the affairs of men
which take in at its flood leads on to fortune. And that's Taoism. But Taoism does tend to be the attitude
of skepticism towards the social and commercial rat race. And says, really, do we have to play that
game? Wouldn't you actually be better off living in a kind of dignified poverty?
So you see, in a way, Taoism is a philosophy for old people. After you sewed your wild oats
and you've made something in life and had children and so on, and you become an old gentleman.
Well, there's enough of that. And so you asked the question, now, behind this facade I put on this
role I've been playing and pretending that I'm someone, who am I really? And what is all this
thing about? So the Taoist is a kind of a mountain man. He goes to the mountains. And you know
that lovely Chinese poem, it's called Seeking the Hermit. I asked the boy beneath the
pines and he says the master's gone alone, herb gathering somewhere on the Mount, cloud hidden,
whereabouts unknown. And so there's this notion, you know, the old man, mysterious old man,
somewhere up there on Mount Tamapai's, and those trails hidden by the mist. And the Taoist really
dig that. And that landscape paintings of the Chinese, of the old masters, sitting on
craggy canyons, drinking sake or whatever plum wine or whatever they have. That's their idea of
the good life. Now, both the Confucians and the Taoists, although there's a certain
puritanism in Confucian ethics, they all believe in the physical world as a good thing.
The Taoist loves nature, the Confucian is particular about parents and family and all that jazz.
The Buddhists of India, on the other hand, tended very often to be anti-physical.
I mean, in other words, to be celibate, to be interested in getting out of this state of consciousness,
in which the world appears to us in its multiplicity. The Chinese never could get on without.
They didn't see any sense in that Indian attitude. So when Buddhism came to China, the Chinese
did a flip with it. And they wanted a kind of Buddhism, which although it was sort of monastic in the
Indian tradition, was not monastic in the way that it is in India or in Burma, Selan.
Buddhism for the Chinese is to some extent, a thing which you go into for a time,
and you attain enlightenment, and then you can come back as it were and do anything you want.
You can have family, you can be a tram, you can just play it anyway, but they feel within
the whole tone of the Mahayana type of Buddhism, even in India, is that once enlightened,
you want to come back. So the situation of a Buddhist monk in the Far East is generally speaking,
that he's not quite like a monk as we understand monks in the West, monks in the West take life vows.
They vow poverty, chastity, and obedience until they die. But in the Far East, a Buddhist monk
may go into the discipline for a number of years and then return to lay life with no bad feelings.
In fact, he may be considered a considerable success in having done so.
So that kind of trend in the confusion and the Taoist attitudes,
when it coalesces with Indian Buddhism, produces something very different from anything you find in India,
and then uniquely and outstandingly represents this sort of attitude.
So, two, when these Indian monks worked with their Chinese opposites, the scholars, to translate
the Buddhist Sanskrit texts into Chinese, it was obvious that they would find equivalent words
from the vocabulary of Taoism. So, for example, when any Chinese master is addressing his students,
the phrase which he's labelled to use in saying students, he says Tao you, Tao you means,
we translated, all you followers of the way of the Tao, the way of nature.
But the Buddhist Marga, the path, the noble eightfold path, the road, the path,
finds the Chinese equivalent in Tao. But Tao means far more than Marga.
Tao has overtones which the word Marga doesn't have in Sanskrit. Marga is simply something like a method,
a course of discipline, set of stages, but Tao means the fundamental way of the world.
What is innate so that if you can find out what is innate in you to do or to be,
and follow that you are following the Tao, you're not following any laid-down set of rules,
but Marga in Sanskrit means a set of rules. So you see what happens.
Now furthermore, say Tao you, is to say the character knew which is follower, actually means
flow. So you'll get fun knew which means the flow of the wind and thus has come to mean
elegance of a certain kind. See suppose somebody is sitting by a stream
like here on a misty evening and bird is calling in the distance and he's sitting there fishing.
But he's not fishing just the catchfish. He's not just a peasant who needs fish. He's a poet.
Doesn't care whether he catches a fish or not. He just loves to be there and dig that scene.
That's fun knew. It's a word that means everything, the fun which means ordinarily wind
also means atmosphere in the sense that we say a place or a room has a certain atmosphere.
That restaurant has atmosphere fun. There's also a function such as Japanese would say
the atmosphere of our school. In other words, the Zen school has a certain
flavor to it which you recognize in the way a man walks or is style. So it's in lightenment,
the experience, it's satory, has a certain style to it that is different from other people's
in lightenment, although they're all equally in lightenment. So Liu, the fun Liu, is the flow.
So, when you translate from Sanskrit, follower of the path and you come out with Douyu or Douyu,
Japanese say Douyu, you get an entirely different meaning. Somebody who flows with the Dou.
So, a Zen monk is called in Chinese. Yun Sui, cloud water man,
Yun Clouds sway water because he drifts like a cloud. He has no attachments to see and he flows
like water. He may be called in Sanskrit. One who has entered the stream,
that's the technical meaning for somebody who's started on the way of Buddhism. He has entered the
stream, but this doesn't have the same quality of meaning as Yun Sui. He has entered the stream
in the sense that he is crossing the stream from the shore to the other shore. But Yun Sui
means he's going with the stream. If you've read that marvelous book of Hellman Esa,
Corsidata, where he ends up with the Enlightenment of his hero by watching a river and get
and learning from the river. You know exactly what a Dou is means by flowing with the Dou.
Because he sees, of course, the river is simultaneously at its source and at its goal
and that all the forms in it are forms of the whole river and at the same time there's nothing
individual about them. Well, I mean, each form is individual, but at the same time it isn't the
lump of water. You know, a wave isn't the lump of water. It's water passing constantly,
flowing through the wave. The wave stays there, but the water flows through. So, that's what he
learned from the stream. So, you see how the Chinese language, when you turn Sanskrit words into it,
the Chinese language with the background of meaning that these words have acquired from Taoist
philosophy made a complete change in the nature of Buddhism. Also, there's another thing to it.
The Chinese call the bluff on a lot of Indian nonsense. I have to explain this by telling
a sort of a modern anecdote. Joseph Campbell, who is as you know the editor of all the works
of Heinrich Zimmer, and actually wrote them himself, all of them as notes, went to India.
And he went to the greatest living guru in India today who is an ex-polisman and said to him,
the sutras say that all things are Brahman isn't this all so true of the illusion of the Maya.
Isn't that the way we feel every day and just ordinary kind of human beings isn't that the Brahman too.
And this man said, you know it's interesting, that was the first question I asked my teacher.
He said, of course, they are. Well, Joseph, nobody in India teaches that anymore.
So, the guru took Joseph downstairs to all his students and said, I want you to meet a great
richy sage from America. He really has found it and you should he will now give you a lecture or something.
I don't know what happened. In other words, the Hindu tends to say,
yes, in fact, all this well that you see now before your eyes is the divine ultimate,
non-dual reality. But of course, you have to find out that it is and when you do, it will disappear.
You will go into what they call, near if you call a samadhi, that means technically it means
being in a state of samadhi without having concepts. But they mean something else by it. They mean
as if all the shapes that you saw before you were suddenly to dim out. And instead, there is nothing
but light. Maybe this is light, it's lightly violet. But I don't know. Anyway, every kind of
sensual experience disappears. Now then, the way in which you have to argue this with a Hindu
Swami who takes this line is to say, but your position is still dualistic because you've moved
from the vision of form to the formless vision. This is just changing places. This is not liberation.
It's somewhere else on the wheel. And you know they have to admit it.
And I once had an argument with a Swami in which I brought up a point we were discussing this morning.
He was referring to the Brahman, the ultimate reality, as the one. It's one that says distinct from
multiplicity. I said, oneness has an opposite. And the Brahman has no opposite. What do you
think he said? He said, you argue just like a Hindu. Well, he knew very well. I mean he was using
loose language. And as we all do. So this was the thing, you see historically, in the
development of Indian philosophy that took place between about 10480 that they faced the fact,
that looking for a state of consciousness that's radically different from this state now,
it's just an escape. It hasn't really come to terms with the problem. The problem is you see that
the state of consciousness you're in now, however, last up it may be, is in Hindu language the player
Vishnu. You are all Vishnu playing that you're in this mess, which is the part of the Cosmic Dance.
So if that's the case, dig it. To see, I mean get with it. Be that. So the Chinese caught onto this.
And when you could say, this very moment, this very world, this very body, is the point.
Now, and if you see or you're seeking something beyond all the time, you never get with it,
you never hear. So they saw that very clearly. So this man, Sun Sun, who I was talking about at the
end of this morning's session, who is one of the first, I would say, really articulate people
about Zen, who wrote the Shinshin main. He starts out by saying, the great Tao, or the perfect Tao,
is without difficulty, except that it avoids picking and choosing. Only when you neither love nor hate,
does it appear in all clarity. A has breadth of deviation from it and a deep gulf is set
between heaven and earth. If you want to get hold of what it looks like, do not be anti or pro
anything. The conflict of longing and losing, this is the disease of the mind.
Okay, now, if you take that quite literally, if you try to avoid picking and choosing,
that's another kind of choice, isn't it? If you say, I ought not to love anything, I ought not to hate
anything. I ought not to take any extreme attitudes. You're still choosing. If I say in psychological
jargon for psychiatric health, you ought to accept yourself. Accept everything that happens.
Well, among the things that happen is the very concrete fact that there are things you don't accept
and that you can't accept. So you have to accept that. Now, do you see what this does?
It's a very interesting technique.
It's saying that you are each one a Buddha enlightened even before you've accepted yourself.
See, you don't have to do anything about it. But it's terribly difficult for human beings to resist
the temptation to do something about it. So it says, okay, do that.
If you want to practice yoga and meditation, go ahead. If you feel that would make you better, do it.
But the point is that there's really nothing to do or there's nothing not to do either.
You won't get this by sort of acting spontaneous in a funny way, but you can do that if you wanted to.
But you're it right where you stand without making a single move.
And that's what's meant, you see, profoundly by avoiding picking and choosing.
Actually, there's nothing you can do about it. You may get the illusion that you're picking
and choosing makes a real difference. That your choices really do change the nature of things, but they don't.
And so, so long as you want to hang on to that illusion and play it, there you are.
But actually, you are as you live and all sit around this room at the moment. In the various stages of what you may consider
subjectively to be goodness and badness, sickness and health, sanity and insanity.
Every one of you is as much a splendid accomplishment as the shape of the clouds.
And just natural. You know, with all the funny hairdos and artificiality and everything, we're all like the birds.
Only we have a complicated way of pretending that we aren't so that we figure out where something special.
And that's it too, you see.
But it's it is a tough job getting anybody to see that.
So, what do they do? They have all these techniques and they're pushing through the mill to cause people won't
accept this vision until they feel they've paid for it.
Until they feel they they they find it and discover after enormous effort like the student I told you about this morning.
There isn't anything to realize.
It really is fantastic. See, so all this is very direct and simple. So, not picking and choosing doesn't mean
that you have to cultivate being detached. You can try that, sure.
But then you find you're terribly attached to your non-attachment.
Like you're proud of your humility or something like that.
It just goes round and round and round. So, you know, come on stuck.
Well, you always wear unstuck because you're in the flow.
And nothing in stuck. It all is changing, changing, changing. One is nothing but a flow of change.
There isn't anything to hang on to and nobody to hang on to it.
You know, here is decaying hand grasping at smoke. It's all falling apart.
And there's nothing anybody can do about it because what anybody is who perhaps could do something about it.
That is falling apart too. It's what's meant by the doctrine of unantman.
There is no the Buddhist idea that there is no permanent self because it's all falling apart.
So, a cheer-up, you know, it's great.
So,
not knowing the profound meaning of things, we disturb our original peace of mind to no purpose.
A original peace of mind is what I was referring to as the child's in the infants,
the baby is fundamental knowledge of the unity of the world, the oceanic feeling of Freud corner.
Perfect like great space, the dowel, lacks nothing and has nothing in excess.
Truly, because of our accepting and rejecting, we don't get the suchness of things.
You see, I explain suchness this morning how it's the way
everything is just like that. But we pick out some things as significant and other things as
not significant. And this prevents us from seeing that all the insignificant things are in a
way significant and all the significant things are in a way insignificant. See that I go on
living is for me significant until I don't anymore. But that means I'm going to run around busy busy
busy busy talk a lot and work at eat and entertain and do this that and the other. And it's a
great dance. Actually, it has no more ultimate meaning than somebody sitting in the living,
being able to live in the living, being able to live in the living, being able to live in the living.
One Zen Master said, from the bathtub to the bathtub I have added stuff in nonsense.
That was his death verse. And the bathtub in which the baby is washed at birth, the bathtub in
which the corpse is washed before burial. All the time he's been talking nonsense. And so all these
birds are going around. I don't want to walk these human beings again, making this great
hullabaloo and dueling houses and all that kind of thing. And it's all, well it's just such
ness, that's the point. So neither follow after nor dwell with the doctrine of the void.
I mean, don't get hooked on the idea that things are empty and therefore that this is a way of
saying that the world is a ghastly sham and something you want to avoid. That's what this means.
So don't try to catch hold of this doctrine as if it would do you some good.
And on the other hand, don't dwell with it. Don't get attached to it.
For if the mind is at peace, these wrong views disappear of themselves. The mind at peace is
not quite what we ordinary mean by peace of mind. Oh, he quotes the thing here on the
comment, neither follow after nor dwell with the doctrine of the void, this verse.
From another early Chinese endmaster, getting rid of things and kinging to emptiness
is an illness of the same kind. It is just like throwing oneself into a fire to avoid being drowned.
When activity is stopped, there is passivity. Now when activity is stopped and there is
passivity, this passivity again is a state of activity. You see, if you practice detachment
and being calm in mind and free from all worldly passions, this in its own turn is a worldly
passion. Since you are attached to this new state, you see, that's the Chinese
criticism of the Hindu viewpoint. Stay where you are. If you try to be spiritual,
this is putting legs on a snake and the snake doesn't need any legs and is only confused by
them when it gets them. But you may have to try to be spiritual or whatever the equivalent of
this is psychoanalyzed, integrated, clear, all the words that are used. You may have to try to do
that to find this out. But that everything you add in this way by clinging to some idea of
detachment, spiritual freedom, Nirvana, whatever, all that in the end is an artificiality
that will be sluffed off. So you might say to you, Spiegelberg's phrase, Zen is the religion of
no religion, that the highest perfection of religion is just not to have any noticeable religion.
See, the gals don't have a religion. They don't preach, they don't pray, they don't recite sutras.
The human beings have to do this thing and have borders and all that. When you really get the point,
none of that's necessary. But then you can have it just for kicks.
