I was discussing last night, the Bodhisattva doctrine in Mahayana Buddhism, and comparing
it or relating it to the two great tendencies in Indian spirituality, anti-worldliness,
or other worldliness, and world affirmation, and showing how the idea that the highest kind
of a Buddha is in a certain way, a non-Buddha. The highest kind of a Buddha is like an ordinary person.
And this comes out very, very much in various tendencies in Zen, where, for example,
or all the painting, peculiarly characteristic of Zen Buddhism in the Chinese and Japanese
tradition, is as it were secular. It has a peculiarly non-religious atmosphere. That is to say,
of the painting of Shingon, sect, and Tendai sect, as you saw it in the museum today, was religious
painting. You could tell at once that the subject matter of these paintings is religious. But with
Zen painting, the way of dealing with philosophical, on spiritual themes is secular.
So that when an artist like Sengai, living in the 17th century Japan, paints the Buddha,
there is something slightly humorous about the Buddha. He wears his halo over one ear,
there is an informality, a slight raffishness, and so this comes from China, from those great Seng artists,
like Liang Kai, who painted the six-patriarch of Zen chopping bamboo's, looking like the most
extraordinarily unkempt country of. So also, the greatest Zen painting
has its subject matter, not really religious themes at all. It uses pine branches, rocks,
bamboo's, grasses, everything of that kind, and you would never know that these things were icons.
Likewise also, in poetry, which we will go into more extensively in the future.
The superb expression of Zen poetry is derived from the Chinese poet Hokoji, who says,
wondrous action, supernatural power, drawing water, carrying fuel. Now, that poem
is a little bit too religious, was entased. And so, preferable to that is Basha's famous poem,
the old pond, a frog jumps in, plop. Plop is the only possible English translation for the
Japanese, Mizuna of the, which means literally the waters sound plop. At that poem, you see,
is a very high-style Zen poem, because it has nothing in it about religion. There is a poem
on the edge, which also was written by Basha, which says, when the lightning flashes, how admirable
he who does not think life is fleeting. You see, the flash of a lightning is a Buddhist cliché
for the transience of the world. Your life goes by and it disappears as fast as a flash of lightning.
That becomes a cliché. So, all religious comments about life eventually become cliches,
religion always is falling apart. And becoming a certain kind of going through the motions,
a kind of imitation of attitudes. As if one would say, we've got a book called The Imitation of Christ,
it's terrible book, because everybody who imitates Christ is a kind of a fake Jesus.
So, in the same way, there's all kinds of imitation Buddhas, not just sitting on altars,
made of wood, and gilded, but just sitting around in monasteries.
So, one might say then that the highest kind of religious or spiritual attainment
has no, no way in a sign about it, that it is religious or that it is spiritual.
And so, as a metaphor for this, there was used in Buddhas and from the very beginning,
the idea of the tracks of birds in the sky. They don't leave any tracks.
And so, the way of the enlightened man is like the track of a bird in the sky.
And as one poem, a Chinese poem says, entering the forest, he does not disturb a blade of grass,
entering the water, he does not make a ripple. In other words, there is no sign about him
to indicate that he is self-consciously religious. And this goes too for the fact that he's not
having any religious sign, he's also not something contrived. It isn't like Protestant simplicity.
You know, all those Catholics with their rituals and how dreadful and insincere that is,
with the real reason you know why Protestant and Catholic ritual is insincere, you know?
It's expensive. Protestantism started in the burger cities of Europe.
Places like Friberg, Hamburg, you know, and Geneva.
Because the merchant class, who were the foundation of the bourgeoisie,
got annoyed because every time a saint's day came around, all their employees got a day off
because it was a holiday and they had to attend mass. So, so many of these nuisance holidays
and all these contributions that were assessed by the church, buying your way out of
purgatory and saying masses for the dead and so on and so forth, they found there's not very
economical. The priests were getting the money instead of the merchants.
And so they decried as unbiblical and their religious and wasteful, all the finery of the Catholic
religion and what it's something plain and simple. So it became in course of time a sign of being
really religious to avoid rituals and to avoid colorful clothing and splendor in churches and to
be as ordinary as possible. But that is not yet the real religion of me giving no sign of having
a religion because this simplicity and absence of ritual itself becomes a sign of where
advertising how spiritual you are. So the completely bodhisattva type of person doesn't leave
any track either by being religious overtly or by being non-religious overtly.
How will you be neither religious, nor non-religious? See, that's the great test. How will you avoid that trap
of being one or the other? It's like, are you a theist or are you an atheist? See, the theist
is caught by God and the idea of God the belief in God but the atheist is equally caught.
Because an atheist is very often an atheist because he cannot stand the idea that God is watching
him all the time that there is this constant all seeing eye, praying on your most private life
and that this is you know how when you're a child in school and you're writing something or doing
arithmetic and the teacher walks around the class and looks over your shoulder.
Nobody wants to be watched like that. Even someone who is good at writing or arithmetic
doesn't want somebody looking over their shoulder while they're doing it. It puts you off,
it bugs you. So the idea of the Lord God who is watching us all the time was judging everything that we
do puts people off and they can't stand it. So better be an atheist to get rid of teacher.
So, but the atheist you see, the man who advertises his disbelief in God is a very
pious person. Nobody believes in God like an atheist. There is no God and I am his prophet.
So then the true Bodhisattva state is very difficult to pin down as being either neither
supremely religious nor blatantly secular and people who think that the height of Buddhism or the
height of Zen is to be perfectly ordinary have still missed the point like the atheist has missed the
point. But for this reason then there is an element in the art, the painting, the poetry, etc.,
which has been inspired by this kind of Buddhism. This kind of art where the subject matter is non-religious,
nevertheless there is something about the way in which this non-religious subject matter is handled
that stops you and you know there's something strange about it. This is how I first became interested
in oriental philosophy and all that kind of thing. I had an absolute fascination for Chinese and
Japanese painting, the secular painting, the landscapes, the treatment of flowers and grasses and
bamboo's. There was something about it that struck me as astonishing even though the subject matter
was extremely ordinary and I just as a child practically I had to find out what was the
strange element in those bamboo's and those grasses. I was being of course taught by those painters
to see grass but there was something in there that one could never pin down, never put your finger on
and that was this thing that I will call the religion of no religion.
The supreme attainment of being a Buddha who can't be detected, who in the sense that
then leaves no trace. You remember some of you have seen those ten paintings called the ten stages
of spiritual Oxford and the author there are two sets of these paintings. There's a heterodox one
and an orthodox one. The heterodox one has the as the man catches the ox it gets progressively
whiter until in the end it disappears altogether and the last picture is an empty circle.
But the orthodox set of paintings doesn't end with the empty circle that the empty circle arises
two from the end, three from the end. It is followed by two others. After the man has attained
the state of emptiness the state in other words of complete iconoclasm the state of no attachment
to any spiritual or psychological or moral crutch. There are two more steps and one is called
returning to the origin which is represented by a tree beside a stream and the final one
called entering the city with hands hanging down. That means hands giving a hand out as it
were giving bounty and it shows the picture of the fat Buddha putai or in Japanese known as Hothae
who is an enormous belly, big ears, who carries round a colossal bag and what do you think this bag
has in it? Trash, wonderful trash, everything that children love, things that everybody else has thrown
away and thought of as valueless, this bum collects and gives it away to children.
And so it says here that he goes on his way without following the steps of the ancient
stages. His door is closed, that's the door of his house and no glimpses of his interior life
are to be seen. So in other words, it's like when you erect a building while you're building it
you have all kinds of scaffolding up. That shows that building is going on but when the building
is complete the scaffolding is taken down. To open a door as they say in Zen you may need to pick
up a brick to knock up the door but when the door is open you don't carry the brick inside.
To cross a river you need a boat but when you reach the other side you don't pick up a boat and
carry it. So the brick, the boat, the scaffolding, all these things represent some sort of religious
technology or method and in the end these are all to disappear so that the saint will not be found
in church. I don't take what I say literally the saint can perfectly readily go to church without
being solid by church but ordinary people when they go to church they come out stinking of religion.
There was a great Zen master once and one of his disciples asked him how am I making progress.
He said you're all right but you have a trivial fault. Well what is that? He said you have too much Zen.
Well he said when your studying Zen don't you think it's very natural to be talking about it?
The master said when it's like an ordinary conversation it is much better and so another
monk who was standing by listening to this exchange said to the master why do you especially
it's like talking about Zen and he replied because it turns one stomach. So what did he mean when
he said when it's like an ordinary everyday conversation it is somewhat better. When the old master
Joshua was asked at the end of the calpa when everything is destroyed and fire there will be one thing
remaining what is that and Joshua replied it's windy again this morning. So in Zen when you're asked a
question about religion you will reply in terms of the secular. When you're asked about something
secular you will reply in terms of religion. So what is the eternal nature of the self? It's windy again this
morning. Please pass me a knife the master hands him the knife with a blade first. Please give
me the other end. What would you do with the other end? See here the disciple starts out with the
ordinary please pass me the knife and suddenly he finds himself involved in a metaphysical problem
but if he starts out with a metaphysical he's going to get involved with the knife.
So now to go deeply into the religion of non-religion we have to understand the what you might
call the final ultimate attainment of Mahayana Buddhist philosophy. And this is contained in a school
of thought which is called in Chinese, Huayun and in Japanese, Kegon. Kegon is the intellectual
foundation for Zen and there was a great Chinese master by the name of Schumitsu who was simultaneously
a Zen master and the fifth patriarch of the Huayun sect. Quah means flower. Yen galland the galland of flowers
and it's all based on a Sanskrit sutra called Avatanghsaka. This is called simply the
in Japanese Kegon Chio. Very big sutra and the subject matter of this sutra are what
are called the four Dharma worlds and I must explain what these four worlds are so that you get
the point. First of all there is a level of being which we will call G. The word G which is Japanese
way of pronouncing the Chinese Church is the world of things and events. What you might call
the common sense world, the everyday world that our senses normally record. This the word G, the character
in Chinese has a multiplicity of meanings because it can mean a thing or an event. It can also
mean business and a fair not in a love affair but something in the way the French say lays
a fair for business. Something important it can also mean affectation putting something on or showing
off and so a person who is a master in Zen is called budji which means no business, no
affectation, nothing special. The poem says on Mount Lou there is misty rain and the river
John as a high tide. When you have not been there your heart is filled with longing but when you have
been there and come back it was nothing special. Misty rain on Mount Lou river John at high tide.
But this nothing special is not a way of putting something down. Do you see that? I could say
well it was nothing special it didn't really amount to anything. That's one way of saying it was
very ordinary. But budji just as it doesn't mean it was very ordinary. In the same way that the
person who has no religion is really the most religious you do see he's not just a common ignorant
moron. He looks like one but he isn't and you have to know what he knows in order to see that
he isn't and to recognize him for what he is. So nothing special budji. It doesn't stand out.
It doesn't as we would say it doesn't stick out like a sore thumb. So the world of G
then means generally the world of particulars. The world of multiplicity the world we ordinarily
feel we're involved in. So that's the first world. The second world is called the world of
re. Now re in Chinese Lee is as I explained to you when we were discussing the idea of the law of
nature. The character means the markings in Jade or the grain in wood or the fiber in muscle.
But in the Hawaiian philosophy the word re means the universal underlying all particulars,
the one underlying all multiplicity. The unitive principle as distinct from G which is the differentiation
principle. So as it were like it's like this when you see into the nature of this world
you start from G. You start from noticing all the particular things and being baffled by their multiplicity
and dealing with the multiplicity of things. But as you go into this you discover as you understand
things what do you mean when you understand things it means you become aware of their relationships
to each other and eventually you see the unity behind them and it is as if the multiplicity of the
world dissolved into unity. You start from noticing all the particular things and being baffled
by the multiplicity and dealing with the multiplicity of things. But as you go into this you discover
as you understand things what do you mean when you understand things it means you become aware
of their relationships to each other and eventually you see the unity behind them and it is as if
the multiplicity of the world dissolved into unity. And so here you encounter a problem.
I can see the world as a unity, I can see the world as multiplicity. But how the devil am I going
to put the two visions together? If I am to be a practical success in business, in family life
and so on, I have to observe the world of particulars. It's particulars that matter.
I have to know chalk from cheese. But if I become a saint, a monk or a hermit then I care
or even perhaps a poet or an artist I will forget about the practical matters and contemplate the
unity, the secret meaning underlying all events. But then every all those practical people are
going to say to me, you're falling down on the job. You've escaped from life. Because they
feel that the world of particulars is the real world. But the other guy says no, your particulars
are not real. You make a success of things, yes, but it's completely temporary. You think you're
an important person that you're really contributing to human life. But actually your success
in doing this sort of thing lasts for a few years and then you fall apart like everybody else does.
Where's your success now? When you're dead, what happened to the millions of dollars you made?
Where are you? All gone. So that isn't real from the standpoint of the person who concentrates
on the unity. So then to perfect our understanding, we have to go to the third of these worlds,
which is called regi mouger. Now that means between regi, the unity and g, the particulars,
moug, there is no gay block. That means the world of the universal and the world of particulars
are not incompatible. Let's take two very different things and see how they can be united. Take
shape and color. Never in a million years, can you, with a black pencil that can draw shapes, make
red. But if you have red, you can draw a circle. You can draw a red circle. Even though
the circle shape and the red color will never be the same. Yet red circle, they go beautifully
together. So think of circle as g and red as re. The circle is the particular, the color is the universal.
They go together. So then we might say, the properly rounded out person is both spiritual
and material. Both are the worldly and worldly. This is the supreme attainment of a human being
to be both. Don't get one sided. A person who is what you might call just a materialist.
Ends up by being very boring. You can live the successful life of the world and you can
own every kind of material refinement. You can have the most beautiful home, delicious food,
marvellous yachts and cars and everything. But if you have no touch of mysticism,
it eventually is all perfectly boring and you will get tired of it. Then on the other hand,
there are people who are purely spiritual and they live in a kind of dry world where all
luxury has been scrubbed away and they are very intense people when you are in their presence
of a very spiritual person, an excessively spiritual person. You feel in kind to sit on the edge
of your chair. You are not at ease because you know the eye of judgment is looking through you and
going down into your very soul and finding that you are just a scallywagg after all. And here's
this absolutely sincere, this dreadfully honest and unselfish person. This is something which is always
puzzling to people brought up in a Western environment because great spiritual people are often very,
very senseless because they can't be materialists in the ordinary sense, they can't be
straight open sensuous because for them the world is too wonderful for that. Any human being
is too marvellous to be treated as just a kind of sexual object. They may be very much a sexual
object but so marvellous you have to stop with it and really go into the whole of that marvellous
wonderful personality. So there is a trouble keeps coming up for the West. When you go to church
and you suddenly go to a church where there is a marvellous clergyman and you think he is the very
exemplar of life and you idealize him and then suddenly they are develops a frightful scandal
that he has an affair with his secretary and you think all is lost that the faith has been
sold out that everything is going to rack and ruin because he was not purely spiritual and
he himself may be terribly confused and worried about this because in our world you see we make
the spiritual and the material mutually exclusive but regi muge this third world means that between
the spiritual and the material there is no obstruction. So we might say this would sound as if it were
the highest level but it is one more to come which is called gg muge this means then a suddenly
re has disappeared but between g and g there is no obstruction between one event and any other event
or events there is no mutual exclusiveness shall I put it that way. This is the doctrine the highest
doctrine of mariana Buddhism which you could call the doctrine of the mutual interpenetration of all
things or the mutual interdependence of all things and it symbol is the what is called indra's net
that is used in the avatang saka sutra imagine at dawn and multi-dimensional spiders web
covered in dew a vast vast spider's web that is the whole cosmos and is not only a kind of a flat thing
but a solid thing and a solid in four five six and n dimensions covered with jewels of dew
all of which have rainbow coloring and every drop of dew contains in it the reflection of
every other drop of dew and since every drop of dew contains the reflections of all the others
each reflected drop of dew contains the reflections you see of all the others and so at infinite
now this is the mariana vision of the world which is to say this is relativity that
whatever exists in this world and is characterized as something particular as a thing as an event
has something or other you see as a unit this does not exist without all other such things in
events so that you might say any one event implies all events and all events the total
universe past present and future depends on every single member in other words you may say
I can understand that I depend on this whole universe there could not be me unless there was
everything else it is harder to see the corollary of that that the whole universe depends on you
you might say well how can that be because I come into being and then I go out of being
and when I'm before I was born I'm sure the universe was here and after I die I'm sure it will go on
how can you say then that the whole thing depends on me very simply
it depends on your supposing your dead and we're talking about someone in the past let's say
we're talking about Socrates and I'm going to say this whole universe depends on Socrates
I may put it more exactly it depends on Socrates having existed you see your parents now
some of your parents may be alive but some of your parents may be dead without your parents
who would not have come into being so you depend on your parents even when your parents have gone
so everything even when you disappear the universe will still depend on you on your
having been here or if you have not yet arrived it depends on your going to be here
so we can say obviously going back to Socrates is the fact that Socrates existed tells us something
about the kind of world we're living in this world once Socrates and that Socrates and his wisdom
was a symptom of the kind of universe we're living in in just the same way as I showed you
that an apple is a symptom of a tree certain kind of tree tells us something about that tree
what it functions how it produces things so a world which produced Socrates or a world which
produced John Doe who was nobody in particular and nobody ever remembered him or thought to
write his biography never the less for all his obscurity the whole universe depends on him
and it depends equally on every fruit fly every net every vibration of every net's wing
and it depends on every last electron however brief its manifestation may be
so that what this is saying is that everything that there is implies everything else and all those
other things collectively in their totality which we call the universe in turn imply each individual
object event and so on that's the meaning of Indra's net so that this is called in Zen
to take up a blade of grass and use it as a golden Buddha 16 feet high
when you have a chain and you pick up a link all the other links come up with it
because it implies if this is a link it is a link in a chain if it isn't it's just an over piece of
metal but if it's a link I'll come all other links so if you are an event every event no
knows such thing as a single event the only possible single event is all events whatsoever
that could be regarded as the only possible atom the only possible single thing is everything
but the things that we call things all imply each other we know what we are only in relation to what we
aren't we know of the sensation of oneself only in relation to a sensation of something other
so the other goes with the self as the back goes with the front and your life however short
everything depends on it if that did not happen nothing would happen so in this sense the whole world
bears your signature it would not be the same world if it weren't for you
you've heard haven't you what is called the pathetic fallacy this was an idea
of the 19th century which said that it was false and wrong to project human feelings on the
world the wind in the pine trees is not sign if you were sign the sun is not happy
it's you are who are happy when the sun shines so don't mix up your happiness with the sun
the sun has no feeling the sun is not human the wind has no feeling and is not human
the poet says the moon does with the light look round how when the heavens are there
and the logician says no the poet looks round with the light at the moon in the bear heavens
how awful I mean if that's what if that's the point you see better not say any poetry
just have prose but actually the moon does look round with the light when the poet
looks round with the light it comes the world of which one symptom is the moon is the same
world of which another symptom is the poet they go together a world where there is a moon implies
a world where there is a poet a world where there is a poet implies a world where there is a moon
so in this sense the moon can be said to look round with the light through the agency of the poet
because you can't separate poet and moon just as you can't separate head and feet
without destroying the unity of the body so in that sense then this whole world is a human world
and we should not take the silly attitude or philosophy called the philosophy of the pathetic
fallacy which says outside our skins it's all in human and dumb and blind force and only inside
the skin is there with a human world all this world is human because it depends not only on the
existence of humanity in general but on the existence of Mary Smith in particular
so the whole world is covered as it were with your personal signature
but at that moment when you suddenly seem to be everything and to be Mr. A you know
you suddenly see the obvious of this that your particular personality
is nothing at all without everything else without everybody else I need in order to be Alan
Watts I need every single other human being and the uncontrollable otherness of all those other
human beings that I can't do anything about they are going to be themselves whatever I do
and yet at the same time I depend on all their difference from me and yet they all depend
likewise on me so that I'm in a very funny position the moment I would be egoless and say
I'm nothing without you then suddenly I find I'm the kingpin they all depend on me
then suddenly with him when I get swell headed about being the kingpin I find I'm nothing at all without them
so everything keeps going blip blip blip blip blip blip now the worst of all
much you think you've got it in one state it transforms itself into the other
that's the ggmugay now in ggmugay you see you've got a vision of the world
in which everybody is boss and nobody is boss there is no one boss who governs the whole thing
it takes care of itself it's a colossal democracy but yet every man and every who guisu and every
snail is king in this world and at the same time is commoner and that's height works and there
is no great king although in Hinduism they have an idea a very strange one to us the
call ishvara ishvara means the supreme personal god the top being in the day of a world and they
many Buddhists believe that there is such a god there is a ruler of the universe but he is lower than
the Buddha because in the course of the endless cycles ishvara will dissolve into nothing
all gods all angels are within the round of being so very curious idea to our minds and therefore
although Buddhist believe in god in that sense they don't take it importantly there are no shrines
in Buddhism to ishvara so then it is through ggmugay this idea of the mutual interpenetration
and interdependence of all things that we have the philosophical basis for Zen as a practical
non intellectual way of life because of the realization that the most ordinary event
the charcoal brazier the matte soup for dinner sneezing
washing your hands going to the bathroom everything all these so-called events
separate events imply the universe so this is why Zen people will use the ordinary event
to demonstrate the cosmic and the metaphysical only they don't rationalize it that way
to see infinity in a grain of sand and eternity in an hour is still re-gmugay and not ggmugay
ggmugay is when you offer somebody the grain of sand for god's sake stop thinking about it
here's the grain of sand there is no difference between the grain of sand and eternity
so you don't have to think about eternity as something implied by the grain of sand
the grain of sand is eternity so in the same way exactly our sitting here at this moment
is not something different from Nirvana we are Nirvana as sitting here exactly like this you see
so you don't have to say any philosophical comment on the grain of sand or on our sitting here
that's called legs on a snake or a beard on a unit
you put legs on a snake you see and you embarrassed the snake in its motion
and a unit doesn't need a beard we would say in our idiom don't give the lily
or Zen would say don't put frost on top of snow
so all what you might call specifically religious activity is legs on a snake
eventually this is going to be eliminated just as eventually we hope that government will be eliminated
and will become unnecessary because every individual will be self-governing and therefore
relate properly to his brother and the state will vanish so to at the same time the church will vanish
and that's why in the in the book of Revelation in the New Testament it is said that in heaven
there is no temple because the whole place is the temple so when we achieve the fulfillment of
Buddhism there is no Buddha no temple no gong no bell because the whole world is the sound of
the bell and the image of Buddha is everything you can look at so as Zen master was asked mountains
and hills are they not all forms of the body of Buddha the master replied yes they are but it's a
pity to say so
