Throughout Asia and Europe, Americans have the undeserved reputation of being authors of
the most materialistic civilisation that ever existed, the undeserved reputation, because
never was there a culture so completely un-materialistic, I define a materialist as a person
who loves material and who reverences it and who delights in using it to its best
advantage. And if you will examine the system of education through which most of our children
are compelled to pass, you will discover that it imparts almost no knowledge whatsoever
of any kind of material competence. Our education is exclusively bookish and is designed
on the whole to train people, to be bureaucrats, bankers, clerks, insurance salesmen,
teachers, and we hope intellectuals. It is a curious thing but in its weak moments it
admits that there are a lot of people going through the scheme who really will never qualify
for graduate school and not even perhaps for college. And for these it must provide rather
regretfully some courses which train them for other things. It's always a joke among
Europeans that in America colleges you can get an AB, you can get credits towards an
AB for courses in basket weaving. And this isn't really so funny as it looks, because
when it is the ideal that sort of everyone should go through college if possible, you have
to adjust to facts, you can't have a nation, you can't have a society in which everyone
is always occupied in intellectual and computational pursuits. A few people have to be around
who know how to handle the material world in a gracious way. And for these people we provide
only regretfully as an afterthought that people who might other words otherwise be dropouts
in high school. Should be given some courses which would prepare them for trades and
carpentry, metallurgy, even perhaps auto mechanics, furniture makers, cooks and so on.
But as a rule, because these kinds of education in the academic world are provided only with
regret, they are provided in a slurvenly fashion. We do not, we simply do not relate
to the material world and we are increasingly lacking in any kind of competence, in handling
physical matter, except in such far out cases as people who make jet aircraft and certain
very sophisticated types of scientific instruments, where it is absolutely necessary that there
are being the highest degree of mastery. Aside from that, because of the lack of material
competence, our life is extremely drab. It is simply astonishing that the wealthiest nation on earth
simply does not know how to enjoy itself in a material in obvious way. Now, you would think,
you see, if you were just an ordinary kind of a horse sense kind of person, that the
richest nation on earth would have a way of a good time. You would think that with all
the money one earns, even doing a factory job, that when the hours of work are over,
the people would go home with all the money that they earn, which makes them princes by comparison
with Indians and Chinese, that they would go home to fantastic banquets, marvellous oranges
and rats of pleasure all the night through. Now, this would simply be common sense to people who
did not suffer from a Protestant ethic. But in fact, what happens?
Is this that we have got life strictly divided into two categories? Work and play. Work on the
hole is something that you do to get money and you are paid to do it because so much work is so
deplorably boring that nobody wants to do it, so they will pay someone else to do it instead.
So while you do it, you watch the clock, you put in your hours and then you get money for
having done it, then you suppose to go home and enjoy yourself and have fun. Well, what do you
do? You get home and instead of having fun, the main thing is to watch TV, TV is an electron
reproduction of existence, which is cut off from you by a glass wall. It has no smell,
if you are very rich, it has color. But you are as in a zoom where you look at something beyond
the bar where it says, do not touch the exhibits, you cannot touch it, you cannot mingle with it,
you merely witness it in a passive way. And while you do this, you are served a TV dinner,
which is something that was originally animal and vegetable, that has been
frozen, so as to deprive it of almost any taste at all, it has then warmed over.
And you eat it, not because you enjoy eating it, but because it's good for you.
It enables you to continue living because it has been carefully studied,
that it has been in it exactly the right amount of calories, carbohydrates and vitamins.
And many of such preparations are served with a small labor, which contains a scientific formula
on them, has to all the good things for you, which it contains. It tastes of nothing whatsoever,
and you eat this while you watch this show going on, you may wash it down with a soft drink,
it's vaguely alcoholic called beer. And in the meantime you get absorbed by the spectacle going
on in front of you in which you do not participate, you merely witness it, and it goes on long enough
for you to be tired enough to go to sleep. This is supposed to be a life of pleasure.
Generally speaking you see, we really are not materialists at all. We don't love material,
we hate it. And we are devoted to the cause of converting it as fast as possible into junk and poison gas.
We are not people who love time, which is one of the measurements of material and space,
which is another, we want to abolish it. We want to get as fast as possible from one place to another,
to get rid of space, and to get rid of time. And the result of this is of course,
that as we get rid of space and time, as we make all places, almost immediately accessible by
jet aircraft, all places become the same place. So naturally the tourist who is beguiled into taking
a holiday in Honolulu asks, is Honolulu still somewhere else? Is it still a land of girls in
Hula skirts, and naked breasts, and palm trees, and louss, and so on? Well they'll make it like
it is vaguely, but of course it isn't. Honolulu is the same place as Kony Island,
Atlantic City. Tokyo is just the same. It is simply an extension of Los Angeles, one of our suburbs.
Because the faster you can get from place to place, the more you have conquered the limitations
of time and space, the more everywhere is the same place. So the differences between different
cultures, the differences between people, the things that we want to see when we go to foreign places
are increasingly unavailable except as something provided in a funny way for the entertainment
of tourists to deceive them into the idea that they really did get somewhere else.
And look at another aspect of this. One of the basic things about material existence is of
course eating food. And as I just indicated, we eat, as in the case of the TV dinner, food,
that is good for us. You know, it's always said that the French eat with gusto,
but the British eat the apologetically, and we haven't inherited the British tradition.
We eat, in a way, it is rather animal to eat. It's a little vulgar that you have to chew food
and stick it down into your stomach and it passes through your intestines. And so on, that's
a rather degrading. It means you are after all an animal, not simply an angel.
And therefore, there should be good reason for doing this vulgar act. And the good reason
is that it's healthy. And therefore, when you eat food, really, ideally, it should all be concentrated
into a pill so that you wouldn't have to waste time, valuable time over meals, but take in the necessary
ingredients for the rather shameful fact that we have to exist in physical bodies and get rid of it.
And so therefore, when you study in general, the art of cooking in the United States,
from coast to coast, it is pretty poor. It is not something that has done out of love,
but something that is done out of duty. And so we are great at it in what I will call eating
the menu instead of the dinner. Because the dinner itself is thrown together in a hurry.
It's simply a job. All sorts of people who have a certain amount of professional training cook,
not because they like cooking, but because it's a job through which you can make money.
Money, which is perfectly abstract and inedible. This is a fallacy you see this division
between work and play. That anybody who regards being a cook in a restaurant or something
which is simply a job that you have to do in order to make money. And therefore, can go out
and have fun in something else besides cooking, has been absolutely diluted. He has been persuaded
to spend a very substantial part of his life doing something which he hates doing in order
that he may earn the well with all to do what is really fun later on. And this insofar as our
education is oriented towards training people for jobs. This is the colossal fallacy in it.
The only jobs worth working at are those which you thoroughly enjoy. And it is possible
to enjoy thoroughly being, say, a cook in a restaurant. If you are allowed to take delight in it
and to reverence the fish, the flower, the vegetables, the fruit which are provided for you
to work with. But as things stand, what happens is exactly the reverse. You go into a restaurant
where they give you a menu, which probably has colored photographs on it of each dish. And it
says something like this. Feel a of Colorado mountain trout. Fry it to a delicate golden brown in
bread crumbs. Garnish with fresh garden peas, french fried potatoes and lemon wedge.
The last time I encountered this, it was in a restaurant where they had the nerve to keep an open
kitchen. And when I saw me, so-called filé of Colorado mountain trout, incidentally this was
in Wyoming. It was a severe rectangle of some off-white substance, which wrestled when it hit the
griddle. You know, the whole thing was completely mechanical, because there was in this process
absolutely no love for the work itself. The cooking, in other words, was wasting his precious
time in life. By going through the motions of being a cook, in order to get money for enjoyment.
Now, the thing that has to be understood fundamentally, in the whole process of education for life.
Yes, that money is an abstraction. It cannot of itself buy any pleasure whatsoever,
because all pleasures involve skill and love. Enough love to discipline yourself to enjoy the pleasure.
I live in, as was told, during the introduction in Sorcelito, which is a lovely waterfront town
north of San Francisco, and we have harbours galore filled with pleasure craft, sailing boats,
motor cruisers, which for the most part, nobody ever uses, except for cocktail part is a board
when they're tied up. Very few people go out on them, because sailing is a difficult craft.
These boats were advertised as something you ought to have to enjoy yourself, but when you got them,
you found that you couldn't enjoy yourself unless you knew how to sail, but you didn't have time
to do that because you were so busy making money. So all his boats to stand around.
The nobody really enjoys them at all, because they won't take the trouble, but having been persuaded
that money is wealth, take another case of this delusion. You can make a lot of money, say,
in the grocery business, by turning out Saudi products, in excellent packages, you cheat on the
weight and you cheat on the quality. You make more and more money. Fine, but when you've got it,
when you're going to buy with it, other people's Saudi products.
We have cars with built-in obsolescence, which are nothing but toy rocket ships.
We have, as I said, various kinds of food stuff, which are increasingly lacking in new
trade developments. We have houses, which are made of tiki-taki.
We have entertainment in which there is no participation. They're not allowed to join. You just watch.
We have, we are busy following our own nest. Have you smelt the air today in the
storm? A dull smell of some kind of funny acid. And this is supposed to be people who are rich
and wealthy and know how to enjoy themselves. It's a fast. To some extent, the reason for this fast
is the whole philosophy of education through which our children are being processed.
I want to look at this, but I want to look at it first of all from the standpoint of
bringing up children in this culture and the whole structure and nature of the family.
Because that's where the puzzle begins. Have you noticed that over many years
a large number of the jokes in most of our popular magazines where they print cartoons
have to do with father as a clown. Take backward in the comic strip.
The incompetence of dad, who is always some kind of an idiot, whereas mom has to handle the real
problems of the family and is therefore the realist in the picture. Dad is a clown. Why?
Because he goes away to a mysterious place called the Office of the Factory,
in which the family as such have no part and no real interest. He brings back a thing called money
and they want more of it. See, back at home. They don't care how you get it.
Just so long as you bring it back because they're not interested in what you as a man do.
And when you come back from the various rat races in which you are engaged making money,
you are supposed to be a good power to the children. Play with them and look after your wife
and appreciate what she's done all during the day, but they have no interest in what you do. They
couldn't care less and furthermore you as a father and you as a mother are expected to live for your children.
Americans have an enormous sense of guilt because they have not done right by their children
and they're trying more and more to do right by their children and they always feel they haven't
quite succeeded somehow. We are child-centered families.
Beauty constantly feeling guilty because we haven't brought them up. Therefore we call in every kind
of specialist and expert and adviser to tell us what we should do with our children.
The difficulty is that the family as an institution is not surviving in industrial culture.
It is an institution designed for an agrarian culture. The family was built around the farm
where the children worked on the farm and understood and were brought up into the interests of the farm.
The small shop or the workshop such as you find in an agrarian culture.
It's fascinating to notice today the transition from agrarian to industrial culture
in a country like Japan where it's been extremely rapid. Let's take the craft of
Carpentry in Japan. The Japanese have been some of the best carpenters in the world.
Absolutely mubbles knowing how to make the most complex joinery constructions without even using
a blueprint doing it by feel and by eye. In order to train a person to do this kind of carpentry
he has to begin to learn when he's seven years old. But as it is now because Japan is transferred
to being an industrial culture. You may not bring up your child in your profession as a carpenter.
You have to send the child to school where it can learn to be an insurance salesman.
The child gets through school, goes through high school. When the child gets out it's not
interested in carpenter, it's interested in girls. As to fool around with that for a while and
then get married and then begin to learn the carpenter's trade and it's too late to be anything
but somebody who follows the blueprint. Therefore this marvelous craft which the Japanese
cultivated for centuries is being lost. For what? I know many carpenters in the United States today
who take enormous pride in their work who love to produce a beautifully finished object made of wood
but they cannot find jobs because no employer can afford that time for this work to finish a
product. It has to be turned out looking good on the surface with a sort of veneer and varnish
but anything thrown together on underside. So it'll wear out and they have to do another one.
So nobody has any satisfaction in the job and the reason is that the family no longer holds
together because the man in the family has to go away and earn a living that has absolutely
no relation to his living relationship with his wife and his children. And therefore naturally
he's regarded as a clown. When he comes home he's not really a very good pal to his children
because the children would find a real relationship with their father in joining in his work with him.
Every little child wants to join in his parents' work. They go into the kitchen. They would
much rather play with the pots and pans than anything else. They want to help. They naturally
want to join in but they cannot. And therefore instead of being allowed to join in with the real
work of their parents they are given propitiatory objects called toys. You may have a toy stove.
You may have toys dolls and pretend that they're babies. You may not actually look after the
baby because they might be an accident. So the children are propitiated with every kind of
thick plastic thing that adults are supposed to use. Especially those real adults who go out and
fight the wars, you know, then they have a plastic gun. And the children are not satisfied with this.
They are absolutely frustrated with it because all these toys fall apart in a hurry. They don't really
work. They don't do what's expected of them. They are not real. And the child knows they are not real.
And you should see Christmas day when you really think about Christmas day in the average family.
And realize that after the children of open all their fake presents which were dolled up to
look as if they were the treasures of princes. And they get the plastic toys and they find everything
doesn't work. And by time for Christmas dinner they are in a screaming tantrum.
Because they know inwardly that they've been insulted. They are not allowed to participate in the
real world. You are children. You don't really count. And so as the whole educational process continues,
they are educated for unreality, for non-entity. By being progressively found, you see,
it works like this. You know this story of a donkey who has a carrot suspended in front of me.
And it's attached to a stick which is far from the donkey's collar. So we always chase it but never
catch it. So this is what we do. We send a child into kindergarten and make him literate.
More or less, run spot, run. And then be the inducement as if you if you learn this, you'll get
into first grade. And while we, if you do well there, you get into second grade. And so,
some of the kind of a common thing, you'll go through the step-by-step educational process.
And it's going to be a big event when you get out of grade school and you go to high school.
The pace is coming on. And you're going to get step-by-step up through high school because of
something at the end of the line. You haven't got it yet. There's a thing coming.
Go to college. You made it that far. And step-by-step you go on and you get to graduate school.
If you're smart at this point, you stay there. But if you, if you don't get into graduate school
so that you can just stay in the academic team of things, you're going to business. That's
getting out into the world. That's graduation. See, now you're really, you're an adult.
Well, then the first thing is you get into a sales meeting. Well, they say is, make that
quota. And if you do, they're going to give you a high quota. And if that thing is at the end of
the line, it's there and all the advertising to say, well, by the time you earn this and get that,
you'll be able to have the right kind of car that I kind of speedboat, the right kind of track
the right kind of clothes and everything, the right kind of drinks. And you'll be there. And finally,
you work along with this, you're earnest. And about the year of 45, you end up as Vice President
of the Company. Maybe President. And you say, I've arrived. I'm there. But I feel vaguely cheated
because I feel just the same as I always felt. I'm there, but I haven't caught up with that
thing I was always promised. And suddenly an insurance man comes around. And hit me, hit me, hit me.
Wait a minute. You're going to retire at 65. We got a program for you. So that you'll be just
right. When you're 65, you'll be able to drop all this business and do what you really want to do.
That time you're not interested. Trust date trouble. Bad teeth. Oh, you're just falling apart.
Because you ate all the stuff that you were making. To make money goes nowhere, absolutely useless.
So you end up feeling you've been cheated. And the reason was simply this.
That education was regarded as a process of preparation.
For something never happened. Never was going to happen. But you were always getting prepared for life.
A real education is an entirely different thing. An education in the real sense is not preparation for life.
It is actually living. It is participating. It is the child participating in adult concerns.
And doing it now and realizing that the point of the process in which the child is engaged
is not to prepare the child for the future. But to enjoy doing the thing today.
Because their whole point is that there is no point whatsoever in making plans for the future.
Except for those people who are capable of living in the present. If you are not capable of living in the present, plans are useless.
Because when those plans come to fruition, you will be incapable of enjoying that fruition.
Don't worry. If you are not capable of living in the present, don't make any plans.
If you are capable of living in the present, then some plans may be useful.
Because they will produce something which you can enjoy and take part in.
But it seems to me that the absolute point of any educational system that has any worth whatsoever
is the progressive allowing of children to participate in activities that adults consider real and important.
And that should begin very early. Instead of saying to children,
no, you go away and play while we do what's important. Let them in on what we consider important at once.
But this is very difficult in what we call the child-centered family.
If you see, you regard what you do in life. As not to say your profession, your vocation, your job.
If you regard that, merely as a means to an end, supposing you are making money in a factory.
Producing something worthless and trashy, but it pays. And you justify this on the grounds
that it will give you money to bring up your children to do something better than you are doing. You are fooling yourself.
Because your child will copy you. And if you exist simply to bring up your children for something better than you have,
then your children will do nothing but exist to bring up their children to do something better than they have.
And they'll always be frustrated.
If on the other hand, you are doing something in life, you have a vocation, a work which you're doing,
which you are really interested in and which you thoroughly enjoy.
And it's this that you live for and not for your children. Then your children will catch your enthusiasm.
And they in turn will find something that they can live for and be really interested in,
and in turn their children will become interested in it. But we are unfortunately a culture,
because we always have the sense of guilt that we haven't brought up our children properly.
We do everything possible we can, theoretically, for the good of the children.
You should not live for the good of your children. You should live for your own good,
and then your children will learn from your example how to live.
So then education then is a progressive letting of children in to adult life.
Not a preparation for adult life. The whole idea of preparation should be discarded.
There is simply increased participation in what we're doing.
I have just come from Mexico from a very primitive area where the educational system is sloppy,
thank goodness. And I watch builders at work and they're wonderfully skillful with brick.
Here are the older men working on a house surrounded with little boys who are their children.
And the little boys are running errands and doing things and they are learning how to build while they help their fathers.
And they feel one with their fathers, dad isn't some obscure being of there who they occasionally meet in the evening
and who does something completely mysterious. And it's supposed to chum up with them on a purely play basis.
See, what it is in our family's dad comes home and he plays with a children about something trivial.
He reads a story about the mousey and the teddy bear.
And having done that, he's satisfied, he's duties, done his penance, having had them.
And but the so-called primitive Mexicans have their children working along with them.
And those Mexican children, I'm not going to speak a Mexico city and the great industrial slums of Mexico.
I'm speaking of a very far out village where they're mostly Indians.
Those children are not children in the sense of cutie, cutie children, they're little men, the boys are.
With a curious competence, a curious wisdom, little men who can be trusted to do all kinds of things.
But they are really related to their parents because they are engaged in the same work as their parents.
But you see, we are the band and all responsibility for our children, by sending them away to be educated by other people
and other children, especially by other children, all equally, I mean it's the blind leading the blind.
And so we are increasingly oppressed by guilt, that we somehow haven't done right by our children.
And we want to give them the best that we can have.
But the whole trouble is we are, may I say, asked backwards, we are living for the children with nothing to give them.
Because we do not have a real enthusiasm for our own vocation or profession or whatever it is in life.
If you make it central, the idea of the Hindus of Yos Fadharma or in the Christian terms vocation,
and that's the thing you really live for, not children.
If you really have that with you, the children will catch it from you, and be inspired by it and join in with it.
But the problem is, you see, that in industrial culture, there are very few opportunities to bring about that state of affairs.
Imagine going to the band and bringing your children along with you, to peek over the counter while you hand out the cash, put in the checks.
We, you see, in any important thing we do, we get rid of our children. We get the babysitter.
And when we're going to have fun in the evening, get the babysitter and keep the children out of it for heaven's sake.
And this is simply symbolic of the fact that children are utterly excluded from real life.
And they are put in these completely artificial schools, where they learn to be cerebral and merely literate.
They learn nothing of the fundamental art of handling matter.
Now what are the fundamental arts that we need in this life?
If we are to be comfortable, if we are to enjoy ourselves,
we need good food, well cooked. Isn't that fundamental? Do you live to eat or do you eat to live?
Both of course. But if you don't live to eat, the food that you eat won't be very
nutritive to enable you to eat to live. You won't take any trouble over it.
You won't love it. Look, when you get materials, you've got some onions, you've got some fish,
you've got a slice of beef. You can't cook that properly unless you love it.
All those are dead creatures which have died in your honor.
What are you going to do about that? The only way to deal respectively,
with a creature that has died in your honor, is to give it an honorable cookie.
The dead cow you are eating is becoming you and the least you can do for it is to let it enjoy
itself as you. Therefore, the stove in the kitchen is an altar and you are a priest at that altar.
And you should reverence that gorgeous thing, look at a beautiful macro
that has been caught and prepared for you and it out by the supermarket.
You've got this thing. It's a living being that's died to give you life. The best thing you can do for it
is to prepare it really. You should brood over your stove with an act of love and see that it's exactly
right. Most people have no idea how to cook fish in this country. They overcook it so that it's dry
and tasteless because they don't watch it. They don't wait to the exact moment when it's right.
Because cooking is regarded as a chore. Something that poor wives have to do.
Kick-dove it. Look at the kitchen. Most kitchen is like bathrooms. You know, you're going to the bathroom
to clean up to excrete and so on, which is sort of nasty so you put it out of the way. The kitchen's
also in most homes are white-washed places with white refrigerators and white washing machines and white
sinks that look like surger is or bathrooms. I've always found a formula where ever you find a
colorless kitchen, you will find tasteless food. Now in any real life, in a real home, the kitchen is
the center of the house. There's a great half where things are bubbling and everybody gathers around
that, waiting with eager appetites while they watch this thing prepared that's going to be just
great. Everybody is just waiting there sitting around the fire to begin and instead of having
you see, most houses are nowadays designed so that you pretend you still have servants.
So there's the Pollock or the Living Space, which is prepared off from the kitchen where
you are ladies and gentlemen, see and then you have a room downstairs where the children play
based on the rumpers room. And you have this thing that your ladies and gentlemen, the living
room and the kitchen off there, where actually the lady of the house shoots out all by herself,
harassed has to get all this stuff ready to present it as a big show to the guests as if
of a buffaloes and goat and every day, read on. There's nothing of the kind. Poor wife is alone
rushing to say when you're entertaining people in the evening, she's fixing all this stuff. Whereas
if we were realistic, the kitchen would be the main room of the house and everybody would gather around
and watch it all being done because nothing increases your appetite more than watching cooking.
And we would treat this as a sacrament, the beautiful thing being done to get the food ready for us.
But this simply doesn't happen except in very few far out-ohemien homes that they returned
with gone thick. So cooking then is one of the arts of material competence.
And we do not teach it. You take a course in Homer's dietetics and so on in the average school,
high school or college. It doesn't teach you how to cook. The class of dietitian or the class of cook
are mutually exclusive because the dietitian is taught to measure everything with a test tube,
whereas a cook is taught to measure everything with a tongue. And you may have the right amount of
this chemical, that chemical and the other chemical in the food that you cook. But unless it is cooked
with love rather than chemistry, it will give everybody indigestion and the hair will fall out.
What's another important thing in life of material competence?
Well obviously the house itself, the home, the building, the place you live in.
A materialist a person who thinks that the material physical world is important
as we are supposed to think would therefore take a great deal of trouble to see
but he has a house that is lovely to live in. Take the look around Los Angeles.
We're living in clapboard thrown together places.
That are in and so. We have ruined the Hollywood Hills here.
By leveling them often to terraces so that you could put the kind of houses that are designed
to be built on a flat area and they're put on the hills and then the water courses are all
changed and when it rains heavily all right, Kim Novak's house is an undated with mud which serves
her right. I'm sorry I like her very much but she shouldn't have bought a house like that.
Because they are not adapted to the hills, if you like to live in the hills you want to live in
the hills therefore don't turn them into flat areas therefore design a house which is appropriate to
a hill. A house which will not disturb the hill which will fit in with the contours of nature
and the vegetation of nature as it already exists which is what you wanted to live in and enjoy any
hours in it. Take another important aspect of material life furniture.
Have you ever looked at the furniture in Dagwood's home? You know it's really one of the things
that we suffer from is we have too much furniture. We have these enormous couches and arm
chairs that look like they were gunning places and over stuffed amongst those things and
all kinds of fake antiques and fake modern stuff too because it's simply things that have been
thrown together by people who didn't like doing it. Much better to have a very few pieces
of furniture made by an artist to enjoy making it and all sorts of clap trap that was thrown together
and is always invariably advertised to be more than what it is and causes frustration,
bitterness and disappointment and a sense of having been cheated when it all falls apart and the
draws stick. And we have amazing pretentious beds, all sorts of headboards and ornamentations
and they are impossible to move around when it comes to moving house they are in a great weight
and inconvenience and unlike practical materialists such as the Japanese we never learned how to
sleep comfortably on the floor. What else is important from the point of view of material
companies? Well we have considered well let's think of clothes that's important here we come across
something fantastic. We just don't know how to dress all men in the United States with some
exceptions on the west coast look like funeral directors. I'm wearing this thing as a
question for Brian. I don't know what's the matter but it absolutely is a violation of the
nature of cloth. Cloth is a two-way system with water and roof and it's woven in rectangles that's
the convenient way to weave cloth and therefore cloth is straight stuff which will hang upon the human body
with great dignity and fall naturally into foes. It's made in say the form of a Japanese
kimono but this thing is a bastard uniform with buttons on the sleeve which serve no other purpose
than a relic of the days when they were there to prevent servants from wiping their noses on the
unit. This thing simply cannot be folded or packed away without making it a must so that it has to
be sent to the cleaners or your wife has to earn it in order to be fit to wear because it is
a fate which is designed to fit the human body to fit the contours of the male figure which is
not in the nature of cloth. Cloth should hang on you and then it is dignified but when it is
shaped in this way it doesn't fit you. You are violated the nature of cloth and therefore you've
got yourself a kind of a silly garment and if furthermore it is not comfortable. Let's take for
example trousers, trousers are designed for women not men not all women look good in trousers but
certainly they are very uncomfortable for men men should wear freely flowing skirts because that suits
their anatomy but we could consider that silly, purely abstract reasons. We were all kinds of complicated
neck ties and buttons and everything to make us uncomfortable and furthermore our clothes are mostly
badly sewn, rottenly put together and very quickly fall apart so that if you want really good clothes
today you must buy them from peasants. You can go for example to Mexico and get gorgeous woolen clothes
seropids, sweaters that are absolutely beautiful. You can still go to the orient and buy
magnificent clothes made by people who enjoy making. Whereas here we dress in a colorless driveway
and we wear this symbolic neck tie. It is really unusual to be strangled with. We in other words
don't enjoy clothing. We ought to enjoy clothing. What's the point of going around in clothes and letting
you enjoy clothes? What else is a matter of fundamental material company that everybody ought to know
about? Well let's take love making. That's very fundamental but this is something that our children learn
through whispered hearsay or through a few courses in hygiene in high school which tell the bare
facts but nothing of the art and this is picked up in a sloppys lovingly way because of this weird
I mean here is the real payoff in this culture where we say we are materialists. In fact what happens is this
everything to do with sexuality is regarded as fundamentally dirty associated with the toilet
but therefore it is something basically prohibited but men brought up in the WASP culture
know that it's really supposed to be fun and so they sort of snicker about it and they it's always
on the side it's something that you don't really enjoy unless you feel it's dirty and you're doing
something you're not supposed to then it's kind of fun and so there's a perpetual hypocrisy play
about the whole thing and nobody ever I mean the most the most banned the most reprehensible thing
you could do in this culture is to come out say with a book on the art of loving which would be
comfortable to a book say on the art of music or the art of cooking that would be
beautifully instructive to show every subtlety every loveliness that is possible in the contact
between male and female that would be serious that would be almost religious in its approach
that would be the most dangerous book imaginable because it's all right so long as it's dirty
it's all right so long as it's filthy but the moment it's something that is really important
and really reverence then we're afraid and this is the test of the whole thing this is the
root of the matter this shows where we are not materialists and do not love material do not love
matter with mother material so as a result we have a culture which instead of being materialist
is abstractious which for example confuses money with wealth you know the situation you go to
the supermarket you fill your little car with all sorts of goodies and you push it up with the counter
and the girl goes click it click it click it click and a long long strip comes out and she says please
30 dollars and 25 cents you feel depressed not perhaps because you thought you were paying too much
for what you got but you just you lost 30 for 30 dollars and 25 cents your bank balance went down
but instead you've got the card full of the stuff you're going to walk out with the real wealth is in the
card you know not mentioning how much of it is fake but it is essentially that is your food
that is the stuff you're going to live on and it's in your car and you're going to go away with it
but you lost the money so in other words the abstract thing the amount of money the figures
the status that you have the all that is more important than the actual physical situation
so it likewise going back to the subject of sexuality the way things look the way the girl is
packaged is much more important than what she is underneath she must look right she must have
figure of a certain fashion will kind of have done in such a fashionable way but a wig on so she
will really look right all she has take it off when she goes to bed I guess and then it's kind of a
let down in other words the point to understand that I'm trying to get across is that while we are
priding ourselves on being masters of the material world we have not mastered it at all except
a few engineering dimensions where we really have done a good job a jet plane is a remarkable
triumph even though if a bullish is distance even though it makes every place the same as every other
place it is in itself a triumph of material competence but in all the fundamental things of life
in closing in cooking in housing in raising children in love making we are the biggest material
incompetence that ever existed because we are our values are abstract instead of concrete how it
looks rather than how it feels how it appears rather than how it tastes and so I would think what I'm
saying is that we need an education which brings us back to nature in the sense not of the bird
of these and the flowers know what's in the mentality but our being focused on the material
presence and knowing that this is where you live and this is what you have to deal with
to be completely related to the physical natural material or whatever you want to call it here and now
to know that's the only place you live you don't live anywhere else
and to be able to live richly and fully in that situation instead of constantly preparing children
for something else later all together I think this means the easing of the school burden
first of all by throwing a lot of it back on the parents
the school system is a huge babysitter system and then but that in turn
requires that parents be in a position to take care of their children as it is you see there
engaged in occupations which necessarily take them away from their children what does that go back
to in the line of cause and effect it goes back to the fact that people are engaged in occupations
which simply make money and which they do not really enjoy and which they do not really live with
and that is why among young people today under 25 there is increasingly unwillingness
corporation job hunters I mean you know people who are looking for bright talent for corporations
going round our colleges today are having an increasingly difficult time because the brighter
the student the less they want to get involved in the traditional kind of corporate life
because that completely takes them away from any form of work which will involve the participation of
the woman they love and the children they love so people are looking for ways of living
whereby they don't live this fragmented abstract work life that is completely cut off
from all the rest of their truly human associations so we are facing a very big revolution
in which our young people want to return to reality and even though what they do may make
very little money it will at least have the satisfaction of being an actual relationship to the real
world in which we live now I don't know is the detailed answers to all that but this is what is coming
it will be very disruptive of things as we know better by far better by far
to live in contact with the actual here and now and to live a life of perpetual suspense
waiting for a gorgeous thing that turned this gun to turn out never never does
