Do you mind if I talk for a while about something I love?
About water and the ocean.
Ever since I can remember anything at all,
the light, the smell,
the sound and motion of the sea has been pure magic.
Even the mere intemation of its presence
goes flying a little way inland.
The quality of light and the sky
beyond hills which screen it from view.
The lowing of fog horns in the night.
If ever I have to get away from it all
and in the words of a Chinese poet
wash all the wrongs of life from my pores,
they're simply nothing better.
And a climb out onto a rock and sit for hours
with nothing in sight but sea and sky.
Although the rhythm of the waves beats a kind of time,
it's not clock or calendar time.
It has no urgency.
It's timeless time.
Because I know I am listening to a rhythm
which has been just the same for millions of years.
And it takes you out of the world of relentlessly ticking clocks.
Cocks for some reason are either always seem to be marching
and arm is never marched to anything but doom.
But there's no marching rhythm in the motion of waves.
It harmonises with the breath.
It does not count our days.
Its pulse is not in the stingy spirit of measuring
of marking out how much still remains.
It's the breathing of eternity.
Like the broma of Indian mythology,
who inhales and exhales,
manifests and dissolves the worlds endlessly forever.
It has a mere conception that sounds appalled in the monotonous.
Until you listen to the breaking and washing of waves.
It lest in the past few weeks,
I've come to live right on the edge of the water.
I have a studio, library and place for writing in an old ferryboat.
Tie it up on the waterfront of saucerleto,
north of San Francisco.
I suppose the nearest thing in America
to a Mediterranean fishing village,
steep hills,
clustered with little houses.
And below along the rim of the bay,
the forest of masks,
rocking, almost imperceptibly,
against the background of water,
and wooded promontories.
In some ways it's rather a messy waterfront,
not as pears and boats, but junkyards, industrial buildings,
and all the inevitable litter at your of our culture.
But somehow the land and sea scape and sobs
and pacifies the mass.
Sheds and sharks thrown together out of old timbers and plywood.
Heaps of disused lumber, rusted machinery, and rotting holes.
All of this is transformed
in the beneficent presence of the sea.
Perhaps it's the quality of the light,
especially early in the morning and towards evening,
when the distinction of sky and water becomes uncertain.
When the whole of space becomes open,
the sort of pearly luminous grey
and the rising or setting moon is straw yellow.
In this light, all the rambling mess of sheds and junkyards is magical.
Blessed with the white cries of gals,
and with the patterns of masks and ropes and boats of anchor,
which put me in mind of landfalls,
and falls a long way away,
and of all the voyages of which one has dreamed.
I look out now as I talk to you,
across a wide space of nothing but water and birds,
ending in a line of green slopes with clumps of trees.
Right over the edge of the boat,
the water contains,
seemingly just under the surface,
a ceaselessly moving network of reflected sunlight,
the through which a school of very tiny fish
passes delightfully uncalled.
And yet only a few yards from where we are moored,
tackles shop sell the marvellous salmon crabs,
with which this particular area abounds.
This is the paradox of the ocean.
Sound, flying spray,
pebbles and shells,
driftwood,
sparkling water,
space incredibly luminous,
with cloud banks along horizons,
underlying skies in which one's imagination can reach forever.
But under the surface of both sky and water,
there's the grim business of praying,
men and birds against fish against fish.
Tortuous process of life continuing
by the painful transformation of one form into another.
The creatures who don't anticipate and reflect imaginatively
upon this holocaust of eating and being eaten,
it's perhaps not so terrible,
but poor man.
The skillful beyond all other animals,
by being able to sink in time.
And knowing the future,
he dies before his dead,
he shrinks from the shark's teeth before they bite him.
He dredds the alien germ,
long, long,
before its banquet begins.
Here is a gal,
that has picked a crab from a tide pool,
sprawled now upon the sand,
the crab shrinks from the walls of its shell,
resounding to the tap of the gal's beak,
who's that knocking at my door.
I suppose the shell of the crab,
the clam or the muscle,
is the boundary of its universe.
To put ourselves in their position,
we should have to imagine a knocking sound,
louder and louder,
that doesn't come from anywhere in particular,
from the door or the walls or the ceiling or the floor.
Think of a knocking that comes from everywhere,
that beats against the boundaries of space and consciousness,
that comes as the intrusion of an utterly unknown dimension
into our own familiar world.
Let me end.
Let me end.
I love you so much I could eat you.
I love you to the very core,
especially the soft juicy parts,
the vitals most tender in the life.
Surrender to this agony,
and you will be transformed into me,
dying to yourself you will become alive as me.
We shall all be changed in a moment in the twinkling of an eye
on the morning of the last trumpet sounds.
For behold, I am he that stands at the door and knocks.
There's no way of getting around it as that.
The gal isn't repatious or greedy.
It's just that he's being alive at all as the same thing as eating crabs.
Seabirds are transformations of fish, men are transformations of wheat, chickens and steers.
And the love for the food is the agony of the food.
To object to this inseparability of pleasure and pain,
life and death is simply to object to existence,
but of course, we cannot help objecting when the time comes.
Objecting to pain is pain.
So far as we know the gal and the fish don't philosophise,
they enjoy life when they're eating it and hate it when being eaten.
They don't reflect upon the process as a whole and say,
how raff it is that we have to work so hard for a living,
or it's just hell having to wash out all the time for those girls.
I'm sure that in their world this is something that just goes along with life like having eyes or feet.
But man, with his astonishing ability to stand aside from himself and think about himself,
ensure to comment on life.
Man has done something which confuses his only existence down to its roots.
For the more sensitive years, the more man finds the very active living in conflict with his moral conscience.
Upon reflection, a universe so arranged that there is no way of living except by destroying other lives.
Seems to be a hideous mistake, not a divine, but a devilish creation.
Of course, there's the myth that once upon a time things were quite otherwise.
That there wasn't no death.
At the land lay down with the land.
But that since then there has been a fall, a vast era,
which has corrupted the whole of nature.
All that must have been years ago, perhaps in some other galaxy,
where the conditions of life are quite different.
Or perhaps the ghastly mistake was just that step in man's evolution,
which made it possible for him to comment, to reflect upon life as a whole.
In being able to stand aside from life and think about it,
he put himself outside it and found it alien.
Perhaps thinking about the world and objected into its whole principle are simply two aspects of the same mechanism.
The very words suggest out there, perhaps we must object to everything that becomes an object.
But, and there are also times when we speak of something that we know as a subject,
the subject of this book, the subject I am now studying,
would it be possible to subject to life instead of objecting to it?
Is this playing with words or does it possibly mean something?
Now if the gals and the fish don't philosophise, they have no consciousness of life being either good as a whole or bad as a whole.
So when we philosophise and pity the poor fish, that's just our problem.
From its own standpoint, the world of animals and insects doesn't find itself problematic at all.
There's not the slightest evidence to suggest it.
On the contrary, I'm inclined to feel that all these creatures really swing,
and go on living up to the very moment when the game is no longer worth the candle.
I'm quite sure they don't lecture each other about their duties,
or worry about whether they're going when they're dead.
Isn't it then rather an enormous relief for us men to see that the plant and animal world is no problem
to itself and that we are wasting intellectual energy in making moral judgments about it.
But of course, we can't return to the unreflective consciousness of the animal world without becoming animals.
To be human is precisely to have that extra circuit of consciousness,
which enables us to know that we know and thus to take an attitude to all that we experience.
The mistake that we've made and this, if anything, is the fall of man,
is to suppose that that extra circuit that ability to take an attitude to life as a whole
is the same as actually standing aside and being separate from what we see.
We seem to feel that the thing which knows that it knows is one's essential self,
that in other words, our personal identity is entirely on the side of the commentator.
We forget that self consciousness is simply a subordinate part and instrument of our being,
a sort of mental count point counterpart to the finger thumb opposition of the human hand,
and which is you finger or the thumb.
Look at the stages of differentiation.
First, the organism from its environment and with this knowledge of the environment.
Second, the distinction of knowing knowledge from knowledge itself.
But all this, like the finger thumb opposition, is a difference which does not divide.
The thumb isn't floating in the air or alongside the rest of the hand.
At their roots they're joined.
And at our roots we are joined to the whole subject of nature.
Of course you may say that nature or the universe is just a big abstraction.
But tell me, is an orange just an abstraction from its component molecules?
I think our difficulty is that our consciousness is too superficial.
As if all our sensation were in the tips of the fingers and not in the palm.
Our comments on life are insufficiently balanced.
By the clear sensation that what we are talking about is ourselves.
And ourselves in a sense far more basic and real than that extra circuit, which knows knowing.
Are we misled by the fact that we move freely on the earth and aren't rooted to it in the same way as trees to the ground and fingers to the hand?
Were we as spatially distant from the earth as one atom of an orange from another?
I suppose we should be somewhere out by the moon.
Now we know that the atom molecule cell or subordinate organ of any particular organism is what it is.
By virtue of its place and its membership in the pattern of the whole,
Blood in a test tube is rapidly ceasing to be the same thing as blood in veins in the same way.
Man must be well, less in cutting himself off psychically from the world that he sees.
And so isolating the subject from the object, less in doing this he rapidly ceases to be man.
So I think this is why I love the ocean.
It's the most difficult part of nature to mess up with emblems and symptoms of man's dissociated consciousness.
It's an environment in which the awareness of our roots can awaken.
In which space so real because of the light and colour can be seen to be joining things instead of separating them.
Yes.
And I've just discovered that that knocking on the wall of space and consciousness was my own heart beating.
