Once upon a time there was a Zen student who quoted an old Buddhist poem to his teacher,
which says, the voices of tolerance are from one great tongue, the lines of the hills
are the pure body of Buddha.
Isn't that right?
He said to the teacher, it is said the teacher, but it's a pity to say so.
It would be, of course, much better if this occasion were celebrated with no talk at all.
And if I address you in the manner of the ancient teachers of Zen, I should hit the microphone
with my fan and leave.
But I somehow have the feeling that since you have contributed to the support of the Zen
center in expectation of learning something, a few words should be said, even though I warn
you, that by explaining these things to you, I shall subject you to a very serious hoax.
Because if I allow you to leave here this evening under the impression that you understand
something about Zen, you will have missed the point entirely.
Because Zen is a way of life, a state of being that is not possible to embrace in any
concept whatsoever, so that any concepts, any ideas, any words that I shall put across
you this evening will have as their object showing you the limitations of words and of
thinking.
Now then, if one must try to say something about what Zen is, and I want to do this
by way of introduction, I must make it himfatic that Zen in its essence is not a doctrine.
There's nothing you're supposed to believe in.
And it's not a philosophy in our sense that is to say a set of ideas, an intellectual
net in which one tries to catch the fish of reality.
Actually the fish of reality is more like water.
It always slips through the net, and in water you know when you get into it there's nothing
to hang on to.
All this universe is like water, it is fluid, it is transient, it is changing.
And when you're thrown into the water after being accustomed to living on the dry land,
and you're not used to the idea of swimming, you try to stand on the water, you try
to catch hold of it, and as a result you drown.
And the only way to survive in the water, and this refers particularly to the waters of modern
philosophical confusion where God is dead, metaphysical propositions are meaningless and there's
really nothing to hang on to, because we're all just falling apart.
And the only thing to do under those circumstances is to learn how to swim, and to swim,
you relax, you let go, you give yourself to the water, and you have to know how to breathe
in the right way, and then you find that the water holds you up, indeed in a certain way
you become the water.
So in the same way one might say, if one attempted to, again I say, misleadingly to put
Zen into any sort of concept, it simply comes down to this.
That in this universe there is one great energy, and we have no name for it.
People have tried various names for it, like God, like Brahman, like Tao, but in the
West the word, God has got so many funny associations attached to it that most of us
have bored with it, when people say, God the Father Almighty, most people feel funny inside.
And so we like to hear new words, we like to hear about Tao, about Brahman, about Shinyo,
and Tathata, and substrange names from the Far East, because they don't carry the same
associations of mockish sanctum and funny meanings from the past.
And actually some of these words that the Buddhists use for the basic energy of the world
really don't mean anything at all, the word Tathata, which is translated in from the Sanskrit
into suchness, or thusness, or something like that, really means something more like
Tathata, based on the word Tath, which in Sanskrit means that, and so in Sanskrit it
is said, Tathamasi, that thou art, or in modern American, you're it, but Tath, that's the
first sound of baby makes when it comes into the world, because the baby looks around,
Tath, Tath, Tath, Tath, Tath, Tath, and Father's flatter themselves and think it's saying
Tath, which means day.
But according to Buddhist philosophy, all this universe is one Tathata, that means 10,000
functions, or 10,000 things, one suchness, and we're all one suchness.
And that means that suchness comes and goes like everything else, because this whole world
is an on and off system, as the Chinese say, it's the Yang and the Yin.
And therefore it consists of, now you see it, now you don't, here you are, here you are,
here you aren't, because that's the very nature of energy to be like waves and waves
have crests and troughs.
Only we, under that being, under a certain kind of sleepiness or illusion, imagine that
the trough is going to overcome the wave, or the crest.
The Yin, the dark principle is going to overcome the Yang, or the light principle, and
that off is finally going to triumph over on.
And we, shall I say, bug ourselves by indulging in that illusion.
G's opposing darkness did win out, wouldn't that be terrible?
And so we're constantly trembling, and thinking that it may, because after all, isn't
it odd that anything exists, it's most peculiar, it requires effort, it requires energy,
and it would be so much easier for there to have been nothing at all.
Therefore we think, well, since being, since the is side of things is so much effort, you
always give up after while and you think back into death.
But death is just the other face of energy, and it's the rest, the not being anything
around that produces something around, just in the same way that you can't have solid
without space or space without solid.
When you wake up to this and realize that the more it changes, the more it's the same
thing, as the friends say, that you are really a playing of this one energy, and there
is nothing else but that, that it is you, but that for you to be always you would be an
insufferable ball, and therefore it is arranged that you stop being you after a while,
and then come back as someone else altogether.
And so when you find that out, you become full energy and delight, as Blake said, energy
is eternal delight, and you suddenly see through the whole sham of things, you realize
you're that, we won't put a name on it, you're that, and you can't be anything else.
So you are relieved, our fundamental terror, that doesn't mean that you're always going
to be a great hero, that you won't jump when you hear it bang, that you won't worry
occasionally, that you won't lose your temper.
It means though that fundamentally deep deep down within you, you will be able to be
human, not a stone Buddha, you know, and then there is a difference made between a living
Buddha and a stone Buddha.
If you go up to a stone Buddha and you hit him hard on the head, nothing happens.
You break your fist or your stick.
But if you hit a living Buddha, he may say, out, and he may feel pain, because if he didn't
feel something, he wouldn't be a human being.
Those are human, they are not devours, they are not gods, they are enlightened men and women,
but the point is that they are not afraid to be human, they are not afraid to let themselves
participate in the pains, difficulties and struggles that naturally go with human existence.
The only difference is, and it's almost an undetectable difference, it takes one to no
one, as Zen poem says, when two Zen masters meet each other on the street, they need
no introduction, when thieves meet, they recognize one another instantly.
So a person who is a real cool Zen understander does not go around saying, oh, I understand
Zen, I have satory, I have this attainment, I have that attainment, I have the other
attainment, because if he said that he wouldn't understand the first thing about it,
so it is then that, if I may put it metaphorically, Juanza said, the perfect man employs
his mind as a mirror, it grasps nothing, it refuses nothing, it receives but does not keep,
and another poem says, of wild geese flying over a lake, the wild geese do not intend
to cast their reflection, and the water has no mind to retain their image.
In other words, this is to be put it very strictly into our modern idiom, this is to live
without hangups.
The word hangup being an almost exact translation of the Japanese Bonneau and the Sanskrit
clasher, ordinarily translated worldly attachment, without that sounds a little bit, you
know what I mean, it sounds pious, and in Zen things that sound pious are said to stink
of Zen, but to have no hangup, that is to say to be able to drift like a cloud and
flow like water, seeing that all life is a magnificent illusion, a playing of energy,
and there is absolutely nothing fundamentally to be afraid of.
Fundamentally, you will be afraid on that surface, you will be afraid of putting your hand
in the fire, you will be afraid of getting sick, etc.
But you will not be afraid of fear.
Fear will pass over your mind like a black cloud will be reflected in the mirror, but of
course the mirror isn't quite the right illustration, space would be better, like a black
cloud or a flies through flows through space without leaving any track, like the stars
don't leave trails behind them.
And so that fundamental that is called the void in Buddhism, the thing that it doesn't
mean void in the sense that it's void in the ordinary sense of emptiness, it means void
in that it is the most real thing there is, but nobody can conceive it.
It's rather the same situation that you get between the speaker in a radio and all the
various sounds which it produces.
On the speaker you hear human voices you hear every kind of musical instrument honking
of horns, the sound of traffic, the explosion of guns.
And it all that tremendous variety of sounds are the vibrations of one diaphragm, but
it never says so.
The announcer doesn't come on first thing in the morning and say, ladies and gentlemen,
all the sounds that you will hear subsequently during the day will be the vibrations of
this diaphragm.
Don't take them for real.
And the radio never mentions its own construction, and it exactly the same way.
You are never able really to examine, to make an object of your own mind just as you
can't look directly into your own eyes or by sharing teeth because you are that.
And if you try to find it and make it something to possess, why that's a great lack
of confidence, that shows you don't really know you're it.
And if you're it, you don't need to make anything of it.
There's nothing to look for, but the test is, are you still looking?
Do you know that?
I mean, not as kind of knowledge that you possess, not something you've learned in school,
like you've got a degree, and you know I've mastered the contents of these books and
remembered it.
In this knowledge, there's nothing to be remembered, nothing to be formulated.
You know it best when you say, well, I don't know it.
Because that means I'm not holding onto it, I'm not trying to cling to it in the form
of a concept because there's absolutely no necessity to do so.
That would be in Zen language, putting legs on a snake or a beard on a unit.
Because we would say, gilding the lily.
Now you say, well, that sounds pretty easy.
You mean to say, all we have to do is just relax.
We don't go around chasing anything anymore.
We abandon religion, we abandon meditations, we abandon this that and the other and
just, um, live it up anyhow.
Just go on.
You know, like a char, father says to a child who keeps asking, why, why, why, why, why, why, why,
why did God make the universe who made God, why, uh, the trees green and so on and so
for the father says, finally, oh, shut up in each of the bun.
It isn't quite like that because you see the thing is this.
All those people who try to realize Zen by doing nothing about it are still trying desperately
to find it.
And they're on the wrong track.
There is another Zen poem which says, you cannot attain it by not thinking, by thinking.
By thinking.
It says, you cannot attain it by thinking.
You cannot grasp it by not thinking.
Or you could say, you cannot catch hold of the meaning of Zen by doing something about
it, but equally, you cannot see into its meaning by doing nothing about it.
Because both are in their different ways, attempts to move from where you are now here,
to somewhere else.
And the point is that we come to an understanding of this, what I call, suchness, only
through being completely here.
And no means are necessary to be completely here.
Either active means on the one hand, no passive means on the other, because in both ways,
you are trying to move away from the immediate now.
But you see, it's difficult to understand language like that.
To understand what is all that is about, there is really one absolutely necessary prerequisite.
And this is the stop thinking.
Now, I am not saying this in the spirit of being an anti-intellectual, because I think a lot,
I talk a lot, write a lot of books, and I am a sort of half-baked scholar.
But you know, if you talk all the time, you will never hear what anybody else has to say.
And therefore, all you will have to talk about is your own conversation.
The same is true for people who think all the time.
That means when I use the word think, talking to yourself, sub vocal conversation,
the constant chit chat of symbols and images and talk and words inside your skull.
Now, if you do that all the time, you will find that you have nothing to think about, except thinking.
And just as you have to stop talking to hear what others have to say, you have to stop thinking
to find out what life is about.
And the moment you stop thinking, you will become into immediate contact with what
Korybski called, so delightfully, the unspeakable world.
That is to say, the non-verbal world.
Some people would call it the physical world.
But these words, physical, non-verbal, material, are all conceptual, and is not a concept.
It's not a noise either.
It's get that.
So when you are awake to that world, you suddenly find that all the so-called differences
between self and other, life and death, pleasure and pain are all conceptual, and they're
not there.
They don't exist at all in that world, which is.
In other words, if I get you hard enough, out doesn't hurt.
If you're in a state of what is called no thought, there is a certain experience, you
see, but you don't call it hurt.
It's like when you were small children, they banged you about, and you cried.
And they said, don't cry, because they wanted to make you hurt and not cry at the same
time, people are other curious about the things they do like that.
But you see, they really wanted you to cry.
In the same way, if you threw up one day, it's very good to throw up when you've eaten
something that isn't good for you.
But your mother said, and made you repress it and feel that throwing up wasn't a good thing
to do.
Because then when you saw people die, and everybody around you started weeping and making
of us, and then you learned from that that dying was terrible.
When somebody got sick, everybody else got anxious, and you learned that getting sick was
something awful.
You learned it from the concept.
So the reason why there is in the practice of Zen, what we did before this lecture began,
to practice Zazen, sitting Zen.
Incidentally, there are three other kinds of Zen, besides Zazen.
Standing Zen, walking Zen, and lying Zen, in Buddhism they speak of the three dignities
of man, walking, standing, sitting, and lying.
And when they say, when you sit, just sit.
When you walk, just walk.
But whatever you do, don't wobble.
In fact, of course, you can wobble.
If you really wobble well.
When the old master Yakujo was asked, what is Zen, he said, when hungry eat, when tired
sleep.
But they said, well, isn't that what everybody does, aren't you just like ordinary
people?
Oh, he said, no, they don't.
When they think of the kind, when they are hungry, they don't just eat, they think
of all sorts of things.
When they are tired, they don't just sleep, but dream all sorts of dreams.
And have the unions won't like that.
But there comes a time when you just dream yourself out, and no more dreams.
You sleep deeply and breathe from your heels.
Now, therefore, Zazen, or sitting Zen, is very, very good thing in the Western world.
We have been running around far too much.
It's all right.
We've been active in our action, has achieved a lot of good things.
But as Aristotle pointed out, long ago, and this is one of the good things about Aristotle,
he said, the goal of action is contemplation.
In other words, busy busy busy busy busy busy busy, but what's it all about?
Especially when people are busy because they think they are going somewhere, and they're
going to get something and attain something.
There's quite a good deal of point to action if you know you're not going anywhere.
If you act like you dance, or like you sing, or play music, then you're not going anywhere.
You're just doing pure action.
But if you act with the thought in mind that as a result of action, you were eventually
going to arrive at some place where everything will be all right.
Then you are on a squirrel cage.
Hopelessly condemned, to what the Buddhist call samsara, the round or rat race of birth
and death, because you think you're going to get somewhere, you're already there.
And it's only a person who has discovered that he's already there, who is capable of action,
because he doesn't act frantically with the thought that he's going to get somewhere.
He acts like he can go into walking meditation at that point, you see?
So we walk, not because we are in a great hurry to get to a destination.
But because the walking itself is great, the walking itself is the meditation.
And when you watch Zen monk's walk, it's very fascinating.
They have a different kind of walk from everybody else in Japan.
Most Japanese shuffle along, or if they wear Western clothes, they race and hurry like we do.
Then monks have a peculiar swing when they walk.
And you have the feeling, they walk rather the same way as a cat.
There's something about it which isn't hesitant.
They're going along all right.
They're not sort of vagueing around, but they're walking just to walk.
And that's walking meditation.
And the point is that one cannot act creatively,
except on the basis of stillness, of having a mind that is from time to time capable of stopping thinking.
And so this practice of sitting and may seem very difficult at first,
because if you sit in the Buddhist way, it makes your legs ache.
And you most Westerners start to fidget.
They find it very boring to sit for a long time.
But the reason they find it boring is that they're still thinking.
If you weren't thinking, you wouldn't notice the passage of time.
And as a matter of fact far from being boring, the world, when looked at without chatter,
becomes amazingly interesting.
The most ordinary sights and sounds and smells.
The texture of shadows on the floor in front of you.
All these things without being named and saying, that's a shadow, that's red,
that's brown, that somebody's foot.
When you don't name things any longer, you start seeing them.
Because say, when a person says, I see a leaf.
Immediately one thinks, are they spearhead shaped thing outlined in black
and filled in with flat green?
No leaf looks like that.
No leaves, leaves are not green.
That's why Loutsa said, the five colors make a man blind.
The five tones make a man deaf.
Because if you can only see five colors, you're blind.
And if you can only hear five tones in music, you're deaf.
You see, if you force sound into five tones,
you force color into five colors, you're blind and deaf.
The world of color is infinite, as is the world of sound.
And it is only through stopping fixing conceptions on the world of color and sound
that you really begin to hear it and see it.
So this shall I be so bold as to use the word discipline of meditation or
Zazan lies behind the extraordinary capacity of Zen people to develop such great
arts as the gardens, the tea ceremony, the calligraphy and the grand painting
of the song Dynasty and of the Japanese Su-Me tradition.
And it was because especially in tea ceremony, which means
literally channel you in Japanese means hot water of tea.
They found in the various simplest things of every day life, magic.
In the words of the poet Hokoji,
marvelous power and supernatural activity, drawing water, carrying wood.
And you know how it is sometimes when you say a word and make the word meaning
you take the word yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
It becomes funny. That's why they lose mood, you know, in Zen training, which means no.
And you get this going for a long time. The word ceases to mean anything.
And it becomes magical. That's so.
Now, what you have to realize in the further continuance of Zazan,
that as you, well, let me say first in a preliminary way, the easiest way to stop thinking.
His first of all, to think about something that doesn't have any meaning.
That's my point in talking about mu or yes or counting your breath or listening to a sound
that has no meaning because that stops you thinking because you become fascinated in the sound.
Then as you get on and you just the sound only comes the point when the sound is taken away
and you wide open. Now at that point, there will be a kind of preliminary so-called satory
and you will think, wow, we, that's it. You'll be so happy, you'll be walking on air.
When Suzuki Dysetz was asked, what is it like to have satory, he said, well, it's like ordinary
everyday experience except about two inches off the ground.
But there's another saying that that student who has attained satory goes to hellestrate as an arrow.
No satory around here because anybody who has a spiritual experience, whether you get it through Zazan
or through LSD or anything, you know, that gives you that experience. If you hold on to it,
say, now I've got it, it's gone out of the window.
Because the minute you grab the living thing is like catching a handful of water,
the harder you clutch the faster it squirts through your fingers.
There's nothing to get hold of because you don't need to get hold of anything.
You had it from the beginning.
Of course, you can see that by various methods of meditation, but the trouble is that people who come
out of that and brag about it. Say, I've seen it equally intolerable that the people who
study Zen and come out and brag to their friends about how much their legs hurt and how long they
sat and what an awful thing it was, they're sickening.
Because the discipline side of this thing is not meant to be something awful. It's not done
in a massochistic spirit or a sadistic spirit. Suffering builds character. Therefore, suffering
is good for you. When I went to school in England, the basic premise of education was that suffering
builds character. Therefore, all senior boys were at liberty to bang about the junior ones with
a perfectly clear conscience because they were doing the mothaver. It was good for them. It was
building their character. As a result of this kind of attitude, the word discipline has begun to
stink. It's been stinking for a long time. But we need a kind of mentality new attitude towards this
because without that quiet and that
non-striving, the life becomes messy. When you let go, finally, because there is nothing to hold
onto, you have to be awfully careful not to turn into loose yogurt.
Let me give two opposite illustrations. When you ask most people to lie flat on the floor and
relax, you find that they are full of tensions because they don't really believe that the
floor will hold them up. Therefore, they are holding themselves together. They are uptight.
They are afraid that if they don't do this, even though the floor is supporting them,
they will suddenly turn into a gelatinous mass and trickle away in all directions.
Then there are other people when you tell them to relax. They go like a limp rag.
But you see, the human organism is a subtle combination of hardness and softness,
our flesh and bones. The side of Zen, which has to do with
neither doing or not doing, but knowing that you are it anyway and you don't have to seek it,
that's Zen flesh. But the side in which you can come back into the world with this attitude
of not seeking and knowing your it and not fall apart, that requires bones.
And one of the most difficult things, this is belongs to, of course, a generation we all know about
that was running around sometime ago, where they caught on to Zen and they started anything goes
painting. They started anything goes sculpture, they started anything goes where of life.
Now, I think we are recovering from that today. It narrated our painters are beginning once again
to return to glory, to marvelous articulateness and vivid colour. Nothing like it has been seen
since the stained glass of shard. That's a good sign. But it requires that there be
in our daily use of freedom. And I'm not just talking about political freedom. I'm talking
about the freedom which comes when you know that you are it forever and ever and ever.
And it will be so nice when you die because that will be a change, but it will come back some
other way. And when you know that and you see through the whole mirage, then watch out, because there
may still be in use some seeds of hostility, some seeds of pride, some seeds of wanting to put
down other people or wanting just to defy the normal arrangements of life. So that is why
in the order of Zen monastery, various duties are assigned. The novices have the light duties
and the more senior you get the heavy duties. For example, the Rochi, very often is the one who cleans
out the Benjo, the toilet. And everything is kept in order. There is a kind of beautiful,
almost princely a set of system. Because by reason of that order being kept all the time,
the vast free energy which is contained in the system doesn't run a muck.
The understanding of Zen, the understanding of awakening, the understanding of
where we will call it mystical experience is one of the most dangerous things in the world.
And for a person who cannot contain it, it's like putting a million volts through your electric
shaver. You blow your mind and it stays blummer. Now, if you go off in that way, that is what
would be called in Buddhism, a Prachika Buddha, private Buddha. He's one who goes off into the transcendental
world and is never seen again. And he's made a mistake from the standpoint of Buddhism,
because from the standpoint of Buddhism, there is no fundamental difference between
the transcendental world and this everyday world. The Bodhisattva, you see, who doesn't go off
into a Nirvana and stay there forever and ever, but comes back and lives ordinary everyday life
to help other beings to see through it too. He doesn't come back because he feels he has some sort
of solemn duty to help mankind and all that kind of pious can't. He comes back because he sees
the two wells at the same. He sees all other beings as Buddhas. He sees them to use the phrase of
recate residents. But now a great thing in the street seems any human nod where move in strange
democracy, the million masks of God. And it's fast, fantastic to look at people and see that they
really deep down are enlightened. They're at their faces of the divine and they look at you and say,
oh, but I'm not divine. I'm just ordinary little mean. You look at them in a funny way and here you
see the Buddha nature looking out of their eyes straight at you and saying, it's not. And saying
it quite sincerely. And that's why when you get up against a great guru, he's then master or whatever,
he has a funny looking his eyes. When you say, I have a problem guru. I really, I mixed up and
I don't understand. He looks at you in his queer way and you think, oh, tell me, he's reading my most
secret thoughts. He's seeing all your awful things I am, all my cowardice, all my shortcomings.
He's not doing anything with a kind. He isn't interested in such things. He's looking out
if I may use Hindu terminology. He's looking at Shiva in you saying, my god, Shiva won't you come
of it. So then you see the Bodhisattva who is, if I, I'm assuming quite a knowledge of Buddhism
in the assembly, but the Bodhisattva has distinct from the Prajyaka Buddha. Bodhisattva doesn't go off
into Nirvana. He doesn't go off into permanent withdrawn ecstasy. He doesn't go into a kind of
catatonic samadhi. That's all right. There are people who do that. That's their vocation.
That's their specialty. Just as a long thing is the long body of Buddha and the short thing is
the short body of Buddha. But if you really understand that Zen, that Buddhist idea of enlightenment
is not comprehended in the idea of the transcendental, neither is it comprehended in the idea
of the ordinary. Not in terms of the infinite, not in terms of the finite, not in terms of the
eternal, not in terms of the temple because they're all concepts. So let me say again, I'm not talking
about the ordering of ordinary everyday life in a reasonable and methodical way as being school
teachers and saying, nice if you were nice people, that's what you would do. Heavens sake don't
be nice people. But the thing is that unless you do have that basic framework of a certain kind
of order and a certain kind of discipline, the force of liberation will blow the world to pieces.
It's too strong a current for the wire. So then it's terribly important to see beyond ecstasy.
Ecstasy is the soft and lovely flesh, hugtable and kissable and that's very good.
The beyond ecstasy are bones, what we call hard facts, hard facts of everyday life incidentally.
We shouldn't forget to mention the soft facts. There are many of them. But in the hard fact,
if they say, what we mean, the world has seen in an ordinary everyday state of consciousness
to find out that that is really no different from the world of supreme ecstasy.
Well, it's rather like this. Let's suppose, as so often happens, you think of ecstasy as inside,
as seeing light. There's a Zen poem which says, a sudden crash of thunder, the mind doors burst open
and there sits the ordinary old man.
See, there's a sudden vision, satory, breaking, wowy, and the doors of the mind are blown apart.
And there sits the ordinary old man. That's just little, little you, you know.
Lightening flashes sparks shower. In one blink of your eyes, you've missed seeing.
Why? Because here is the light, the light, the light, the light, every mystic in the world,
has seen the light that brilliantly blazing energy, brighter than a thousand suns, which is locked
up in everything. Now imagine this. Imagine you're seeing it. Like you see Orioles,
round Buddhas, like you see the beautific vision at the end of Dante's Paradee. So vivid,
vivid light, so bright, that is like the clear light of the void in the Tibetan book of the dead.
It's beyond light. It's so bright. And you watch it receding from you. And on the edges,
like a great star that becomes a rim of red. And beyond that a rim of orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, violet. You see this great mandala appearing, this great sun. And beyond the violet,
there's black, black, like obsidian, not flat, black, but transparent, black, like lacquer.
And again blazing out of the black as the young comes from the in, more light,
going, going, going. And along with this light, there comes sound.
There's a sound so tremendous with the white light that you can't hear it.
So piercing that it seems to annihilate the ears. But then along with the colours, the sound goes
down the scale in harmonic intervals, down, down, down, down, until it gets to a deep,
thundering base, which is so vibrant that in turn it turns into something solid.
And you begin to get the similar spectrum of textures. Now all this time you've been watching
a kind of a thing radiating out. But it says, you know, this isn't all I can do.
And the rays start going, yui, yui, yui, yui, yui, yui dancing like this. And actually the sound
starts going waving to, as it comes out. And then the textures start varying themselves.
And they say, well, you've been looking at this thing as I've been describing it so far,
in a flat dimension. Let's add a third dimension. It's going to come right at you, now.
See this way? And meanwhile, it says it's not just that we're going to go, yui, yui,
like this. It's going to go as you...
Beeting the sound.
And if as well, it's just a beginning we can go ...
... and then suddenly you see in all the little details that become so intense.
The all kinds of little subfigures that contained within what you thought were originally the main figures.
And the sound starts going all different, amazing, complexities have sound all over the place.
And the thing's going going, and you think you've got to go out of your mind, and suddenly it turns into ...
Why us sitting around here?
Thank you very much.
