Some years ago, I had just given a talk on television in Canada.
When one of the announcers came up to me and said, you know, if one can believe that this
universe is in charge of an intelligent and beneficent God, don't you think he would naturally
have provided us with an infallible guide to behavior and to the truth about the universe?
And of course, I knew he meant the Bible.
I said, no, I think nothing of the kind, because I think a loving God would not do something
to his children that would rot their brains.
Because if we had an infallible guide, we would never think for ourselves.
And therefore our minds would become atrophied.
The disusive, my grandfather had left me a million dollars, I'm glad he didn't.
And we have therefore to begin any discussion of the meaning of the life and teaching of
Jesus, with a look at this thorny question of authority.
And especially the authority of Holy Scripture.
Because in this country in particular, there are an enormous number of people who seem
to believe that the Bible descended from heaven with an angel in the year 1600-11, which
was when the so-called King James, or more correctly authorised version of the Bible, was translated
into English.
I had a crazy uncle who believed that every word of the Bible was literally true, including
the marginal notes.
And so whatever date it said, it said in the marginal notes that the world was created
in 4,000 and 4 BC, and he believed it as the word of God.
Until one day he was reading, I think, a passage in the book of Proverbs, and found a
naughty word in the Bible.
And from that time on, he was through with it, you know, how Protestant can you get?
Now, the question of authority needs to be understood, because I am not going to claim
any authority in what I say to you, except the authority, such as it is, of history.
And that's a pretty uncertain authority.
But from my point of view, the four gospels are, I think, to be regarded on the whole
as historical documents, are even grant the miracles, because speaking is one heavily
influenced by Buddhism, we are not very impressed by miracles.
The traditions of Asia, Hindu, Buddhist, Darwin, and so forth are full of miraculous
stories.
And we take them in our stride.
We don't think that there are any sign of anything in particular except psychic power.
We in the West have, by scientific technology, accomplished things, are a very startling
nature.
We could blow up the whole planet, and Tibetan magicians have never promised to do anything
like that.
And I'm really a little scared of the growing interest in psychic power, because that's
what I call psychotechnics.
And we've made such a mess of things with ordinary techniques that haven't only knows
what we might do, if we got hold of psychotechnics and started raising people from the dead
and prolonging life in sufferably, and doing everything we wished.
In the whole answer to the story of miracles, it's simply imagine that you're God, and
that you can have anything you want.
Well, you'd have it for quite a long time.
And then after a while, we say, this is getting pretty dull, because I know in advance
everything that's going to happen.
And so you would wish for a surprise, and you would find yourself this evening in this
church as a human being.
So I mean, that is the miracle thing.
I think miracles are probably possible.
That doesn't bother me.
And it's a matter of fact, when you read the writings of the early fathers of the church,
the great zelogen, like, sentiment, Gregory of Nissa, Saint John of Damascus, and
seven Thomas Aquinas, they're not interested in the history of the Bible.
They take that sort of for granted, but forget it.
They're interested in its deeper meaning.
And therefore, they always interpret all the tales like Jonah and the Whale, they don't
bother even to doubt whether Jonah was or was not swallowed by a whale or other big fish.
But they see in the story of Jonah and the Whale, a prefiguration of the resurrection
of Christ.
And then even when it comes to the resurrection of Christ, they're not worrying about
the chemistry of the physics of a risen body.
What they're interested in is that the idea of the resurrection of the body has something
to say about the meaning of the physical body in the eyes of God, that the physical body
in other words is not something worthless and unspiritual, but something which is an object
of the divine love.
And so, therefore, I'm not going to be concerned with whether or not miraculous events
happened.
It seems to me entirely beside the point.
So I regard the four gospels as on the whole as good a historical document has anything
else we have from that period, including the gospel of St. John, and that's important.
It used to be fashion and would regard the gospel of St. John as late.
In other words, at the turn of the century, the higher critics of the New Testament assign
the gospel of St. John to about 125 AD.
And the reason was just simple.
Those higher critics at that time just assumed that the simple teachings of Jesus could
not possibly have included any such complicated mystical theology.
And therefore, they said, well, it must be later.
Now, as a matter of fact, in the text of the gospel of St. John, the local colour, his knowledge
of the topography of Jerusalem, and his knowledge of the Jewish calendar is more accurate
than that of the other three writers, Matthew Mark and Luke.
It seems to me perfectly simple to assume that John recorded the inner teaching which he
gave to his disciples, and that Matthew Mark and Luke record the more exoteric teaching
which he gave to people at large.
Now what about then the authority of these scriptures?
We could take this problem in two steps.
A lot of people don't know how we got the Bible at all.
We Westerners got the Bible thanks to the Catholic Church.
The Catholic Church and members of the Church wrote the books of the New Testament.
And they took over the books of the Old Testament, which even by the time of Christ had not
been finally decided upon by the Jews.
The Jews did not close the canon of the Old Testament until the year 100 AD, or there
about, have the Senate of Jamnia, and then they finally decided which were the canonical
books of the Hebrew scriptures.
And embodied them in the maseretic text, the earliest copy of which dates from the 10th century,
early in the 10th century, AD.
The books to be included in the New Testament were not finally decided upon until the
year 382 AD, again, at the Senate of Rome under Pope Damascus.
So it was the Church, the Catholic Church that promulgated the Bible, and said we are giving
you these scriptures on our authority and by the authority of the informal tradition that
is existed among us from the beginning inspired by the Holy Spirit.
So you receive historically the Bible on the Church's say-so.
And the Catholic Church insists therefore that the Church collectively speaking under the
presumed guidance of the Holy Spirit has the authority to interpret the Bible.
And you can take that or leave it.
Because obviously, the authority of the Bible is not first of all based on the Bible itself.
I can write a Bible and state within that book that it is indeed the Word of God which
I have received, and you are at liberty to believe me or not.
Hindus believe that the Vedas are divinely revealed and inspired with just as much
further as any Christian or any Jew.
Muslims believe that the Koran is divinely inspired and some Buddhists believe that their
sutras are also of divine or rather a buddhic origin.
The Japanese believe that the ancient texts of Shinto are likewise of divine origin.
If we are going to argue about this as to which version of the truth is the correct one,
we will always end up in an argument in which the judge and the advocate are the same person.
And you wouldn't want that if you were brought into a court of law, would you?
Because if I say that, well, thinking it all over, I find that Jesus Christ is the greatest
being who ever came out of this earth by what standards do I judge?
Why, obviously, I judge by the sort of moral standards that have been given to me as somebody
brought up in a Christian culture.
There is nobody in partial who can decide between all the religions because more or less
everybody has been in one way or another influence by one of them.
So if the church says the Bible is true, it finally comes down to you, are you going to
believe the church or aren't you?
If nobody believes the church, it will be perfectly plain, won't it, that the church has
no authority?
Because the people, as always, the source of authority, that's why the talkville said
that the people get what government it deserves.
And so you may say, well, God himself is the authority.
Well, how are we to show that?
That's your opinion.
Well, you say, well, you wait and see, the day of judgment is coming and then you'll find
out who is the authority.
Yes, but at the moment, there is no evidence for the day of judgment.
And it remains until there is evidence simply your opinion that the day of judgment is coming
and there is nothing else to go on, except the opinion of other people who hold the same
view and whose opinions you bought.
So really, I won't deny anybody's right to hold these opinions.
You may indeed believe that the Bible is literally true and that it was actually dictated
by God to Moses and the prophets and the apostles.
That may be your opinion and you are at liberty to hold it.
I don't agree with you.
I do believe on the other hand that there is a sense in which the Bible is divinely inspired.
But I mean by inspiration, something utterly different from dictation, receiving a dictated
message from an omniscient authority.
I think inspiration comes very seldom in words.
In fact, almost all the words written down by automatic writing from the psychic input that
I've ever read strike me as a bit thin.
When a psychic begins to try and write of deep mysteries instead of telling you what your
sickness is or who your grandmother was, he begins to get superficial and psychicly communicated
philosophy is never as interesting as philosophy carefully thought out.
But divine inspiration isn't that kind of communication.
An inspiration is, for example, to feel for reasons that you can't really understand that
you love people.
Divine inspiration is a wisdom which is very difficult to put into words like mystical
experience, that's divine inspiration and a person who writes out of that experience could
be said to be divinely inspired or it might come through dreams, through archetypal messages
from the collective unconscious through which the Holy Spirit could be said to work.
But since inspiration always comes through a human vehicle, it is labelled to be distorted
by that vehicle.
In other words, I'm talking to you through a sound system and it's the only one now available.
Now if there's something wrong with this sound system, whatever truths I might utter to
you will be distorted, my voice will be distorted and you might mistake the meaning of what
I said.
Now so therefore everybody who receives divine inspiration and I'm using that in a very loose
way, you can mean anything you like by divine, that's your option.
But anybody who receives it will express it within the limits of what language he knows.
And by language here, I don't only mean English, Latin, Greek, Hebrew or Sanskrit.
I mean language in the sense of what sort of terms are available to you.
That is what kind of religion will you brought up with.
Now you see, if you were brought up in the Bible built, you came out of Arkansas somewhere.
And that's all the religion you knew and you had a mystical experience of the type where
you suddenly discovered that you are one with God.
When you're liable to get up and say, I'm Jesus Christ and lots of people do.
Well the culture that we live in just can't allow that, there are only one Jesus Christ.
And sort of you don't look like you were Jesus Christ coming back again because it's
said in the scriptures that when he comes back, we'll be no doubt about it.
He'll appear in the heavens with legions of angels and you're not doing that.
You're just old Joe Dokes that we knew years ago and now you say you're Jesus Christ.
Well he says that when Jesus Christ said he was God nobody believed him and you don't believe
again, you can't answer that argument.
But you see, he says it that way because he is trying to express what happened to him.
In terms of a religious language which is circumscribed by the Holy Bible, he's never read
the Upanishads.
He's never read the Diamond Sutra.
He's never read the Tibetan book of the dead or the E.J. or the Lao dsa.
And therefore there is no other way in which he can say this.
But if he had read the Upanishads, he would have had no difficulty and nor would the culture
the society in which he was talking have any difficulty because it says in the Upanishads,
we are all incarnations of God.
Only they don't mean by the word God, in fact they don't use that word, they use Brahman.
They don't mean the same thing that a Hebrew meant by God because the Brahman is not
personal.
Brahman is, we would say, super personal, not impersonal because that is a negation that
I would say, super personal.
Brahman is not he or she has no sex.
Brahman is not the creator of the world as something underneath and subject to Brahman.
Because the actor of the world, the player of all the parts so that everyone is a mask,
which is the meaning of the word person, in which the Brahman plays a role.
And like an absorbed actor, the divine spirit gets so absorbed in playing the role as
to become it.
And to be bewitched, and this is all part of the game, you know, to believing, I am that
role.
When you were babies, you knew who you were, psychoanalyst refer to that as the oceanic
feeling, they don't really like it, but they admit that it exists, where the baby cannot
distinguish between the world and the way it acts upon the world.
It's all one process, which is, of course, the way things are.
But we learn very quickly because we are taught very quickly, what is you and what is not
you, what is voluntary, what is involuntary, because you can be punished for the voluntary,
but not for the involuntary.
And so we unlearn what we knew in the beginning.
And in the course of life, if we're fortunate, we discover again what we really are,
the deach one of us is what would be called in Arabic or Hebrew, the Son of God.
And the word, Son of means of the nature of, as when you call someone a son of a bitch,
or in Arabic you say, Evity Kelb, which means son of a dog, Evity El-Homa, son of
a donkey, so a son of Billio, means an evil person, son of God means a divine person.
Human being who has realized union with God.
Now my assumption, my opinion, is the Jesus of Nazareth, was a human being, like Buddha,
like Sri Ramakrishna, like Ramana Mahashi, etc.
Who early in life had a colossal experience of what we call cosmic consciousness.
Now you don't have to be any particular kind of religion to get this experience.
It can hit anyone any time, like falling in love.
There are obviously a number of you in this building who've had it, in greater or less a degree,
but it's found all over the world.
And when it hits you, you know it.
Sometimes it comes after long practice of meditations and spiritual discipline.
Sometimes it comes for no reason that anybody can determine.
We say it's the grace of God, that that comes this overwhelming conviction, that you have
mistaken your identity, that what you thought, what I thought was just old Alan Watts,
who I know very well is just a big act on a show.
So what I thought was in me was only completely superficial, that I am an expression
of an eternal something or other, X, a name that can't be named as the name of God was
taboo among the Hebrews, I am.
And that I suddenly understand why, exactly why everything is the way it is, it's perfectly
clear.
Furthermore, I feel no longer any boundary between what I do and what happens to me.
I feel that everything that's going on is my doing, just as my breathing is, is your breathing
voluntary or involuntary.
Do you do it or does it happen to you?
So you can feel it both ways, but you feel everything like breathing.
And it isn't as if you had become a puppet, there is no longer any separate you, there
is just this great happening going on.
And if you have the name in your background, you will say this happening is God, or the
will of God, or the doing of God.
Or if you don't have that word in your background, you will say with a Chinese, it is
the flowing of the dowel.
Or if you are a Hindu, you will say it is the Maya of Brahman.
The Maya means the magical power, the creative illusion, the play.
So you can very well understand how people to whom this happens, feel genuinely inspired.
Because very often there goes along with it, an extremely warm feeling, because you see
the divine in everybody else's eyes.
When Kabir, a great Hindu Muslim mystic, was a very old man.
He used to look around at people and say, to whom shall I preach?
Because he saw the beloved in all eyes.
And could see that sometimes I look into people's eyes, and I can look right down, and
I can see that beloved in the depths of those pools.
And yet the expression on the face is saying, what me?
It's a funniest thing.
But there is everybody in his own peculiar way, playing out an essential part in this colossal
cosmic drama.
And it's so strange that one can even feel it in people you thoroughly dislike.
So let's suppose then that Jesus had such an experience.
And there of all ranges, as I said, this could be a very, very strong one indeed.
And from the sayings of Jesus, especially in the Gospel of Saint John, anybody who studied
the psychology of religion can easily detect that that experience must have taken place
or something very like it.
But you see, Jesus has a limitation that he doesn't know of any religion, other than those
of the immediate Near East.
He might know something about Egyptian religion.
A little bit may be about Greek religion, but mostly about Hebrew.
There is no evidence whatsoever that he knew anything about India or China.
And people who think that Jesus was God assumed that he must have done because he
would have been omniscient.
No.
Saint Paul makes it perfectly clear in the epistle to the Philippians that Jesus renounced
his divine powers.
So as to be man.
So let's suppose then that Jesus had such an experience.
But you see, Jesus has a limitation that he doesn't know of any religion, other than
those of the immediate Near East.
He might know something about Egyptian religion.
A little bit may be about Greek religion, but mostly about Hebrew.
There is no evidence whatsoever that he knew anything about India or China.
And people who think that Jesus was God assumed that he must have done because he
would have been omniscient.
No.
Saint Paul makes it perfectly clear in the epistle to the Philippians.
That Jesus renounced his divine powers.
So as to be man, let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who being
in the form of God thought not equality with God a thing to be hung onto.
But humbled himself and made himself of no reputation and was found in fashion as a man
and became obedient to death.
Theologians call that Kenosis, which means self-emptying.
So obviously, an omnipotent, an omniscient man would not really be a man.
So even if you take the very orthodox Catholic doctrine of the nature of Christ that he
was both true God and true man, you must say that for true God to be
united with true man, true God has to make a voluntary renunciation for the time being
of omniscience and omnipotence and omnipresence for that matter.
Now therefore, if Jesus were to come right out and say, I am the Son of God, that's
like saying I'm the boss's son or I am the boss and everybody immediately says that
is blasphemy.
That is subversion that is trying to introduce democracy into the kingdom of heaven.
That is, you are a user of the throne, no man has seen God.
Now Jesus in his exoteric teaching has recorded in the synoptic gospels, was pretty cagey
about this.
He didn't come right out there and say, I am the father of our one.
Instead he identified himself with the Messiah described in the second part of the prophet
Isaiah.
The suffering servant who was despised and rejected of men and this man is the non-political
Messiah in other words.
He was convenient to make that identification, even though it would get him into trouble.
But to his elect disciples as recorded in synchon, he came right out and said, before Abraham
was I am, I am the way the truth in the life.
I am the resurrection in the life.
I am the living bread that comes down from heaven.
I and the father are one and he who has seen me has seen the father and there can be
no mistaking that language.
So the Jews found out and they put him to death or had him put to death for blasphemy.
This is no cause for any special antagonism to the Jews.
We would do exactly the same thing.
It's always done.
It happened to one of the great Sufi mystics in Persia who had the same experience.
Now what happened?
The apostles didn't quite get the point.
They were odd by the miracles of Jesus.
They worshiped him as people do worship gurus and it's you know to what lengths that can
go if you've been around Guru Land.
And so the Christians said okay, Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God but let it stop
right there, nobody else.
So what happened was that Jesus was pedestalized.
He was put in a position that was safely upstairs so that his troublesome experience of
cosmic consciousness would not come and cause other people to be a nuisance.
And those who have had this experience and expressed it during those times when the church
had political power were almost invariably persecuted.
Godyana Bruno was burnt at the stake.
John Scotus, a region of his excommunicated.
Mised to Eckhart's theses were condemned and so on and so on.
A few mystics got away with it because they used cautious language.
But you see what happens.
If you pedestalize Jesus, you strangle the gospel at birth and it has been the tradition
in both the Catholic church and in Protestantism to pass off what I will call an emasculated
gospel.
Gospel means good news and I cannot for the life of me think what is the good news
about the gospel is ordinarily handed down.
Look here, here is the revelation of God in Christ in Jesus and we are supposed to follow
his life an example.
Without having the unique advantage of being the boss is son.
Now the tradition, both Catholic and Protestant fundamentalist represents Jesus to us as
a freak born of a virgin, knowing he is the son of God, having the power of miracles,
knowing that basically it's impossible to kill him, he's going to rise again in the
end.
And we ask to take up our cross and follow him when we don't know that about ourselves at all.
So what happens is this?
We are delivered therefore a gospel which is in fact an impossible religion.
It's impossible to follow the way of Christ.
All right, many are Christian as admitted it.
I'm a miserable sinner.
I fall far short of the example of Christ.
But do you realize the more you say that, the better you are.
Because what happened was that Christianity institutionalized guilt as a virtue.
You see, you can never come up to it, never.
And therefore you will always be aware of your shortcomings.
And so the more shortcomings you feel, the more in other words you are aware of the vast
abyss between Christ and yourself.
You will have your opportunity to speak in the question period, Madam.
So you go to confession.
And if you've got a nice dear understanding confesser, you won't get angry with it, you'll
say my child, you know you've sinned very grievously.
But you must realize that the love of God and of our Lord is infinite.
And that naturally you are forgiven as a token of thanksgiving, say, three hellmarish.
And you know you've committed a murder and robbed a bank and fornicated around and so on.
The priest has birthed a patient in quiet.
Well, you feel awful.
I have done that.
To the love of God, I have wounded Jesus, grieved the Holy Spirit and so on.
But you know, in the back of your mind, you're going to do it all over again.
You won't be able to help yourself.
You'll try, but there's always a greater and greater sense of guilt.
Now the lady objected that I was putting out a straw man and knocking it down.
This is the Christianity of most people.
Now there is a much more subtle Christianity of the theologians, the mystics and the philosophers.
It is not what gets preached from the pulpit, grant you.
But the message of Billy Graham is approximately what I've given you.
And I've all what I will call fundamentalist forms of Catholicism and Protestantism.
What would the real gospel be?
The real good news is not simply that Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God.
But that he was a powerful Son of God who came to open everybody's eyes to the fact that you are too.
This is perfectly plain.
If you will go to the 10th chapter of St. John, verse 30, there is the passage where Jesus says,
I and the Father are one.
And this is there are some people who are not intimate disciples around and they're horrified
and they immediately pick up stones to stone him.
He says, many good works I have shown you from the Father and for which are these do you
stone me?
And they said, for a good work, we stone you not, but for blasphemy because you being a man
make yourself God.
And he replied, isn't it written in your law?
I have said you are gods.
He's quoting the 22nd Psalm.
Is it not written in your law?
I have said you are gods.
If God call them those to whom He gave His word, gods, and you can't deny the scriptures.
How can you say I blaspheme?
Because I said I am a Son of God.
Well, there's the whole thing in a nutshell.
Because if you read the King James Bible that descended with the angel, you will see in
italics in front of these words Son of God, these Son of God, because I said I am
these Son of God and most people think that the italics are for emphasis, they're not.
The italics indicate words interpolated by the translators.
You will not find that in the Greek, the Greek says, a Son of God.
So it seems to me here perfectly plain.
But Jesus is God in the back of His mind that this isn't something peculiar to Himself.
So when He says, I am the way, no man comes to the Father but by me.
This I am, this me, is the divine in us, which in Hebrew would be called the Ruach Adhanai.
This is a great deal of made of this by the esoteric Jews, the Kabbalists and the Hasidim.
The Ruach is the breath which God breathed into the nostrils of Adam.
It is differing from the soul, the individual soul in Hebrew is called Nefesh.
And so we translate the Ruach into the Greek Panepma and the Nefesh into Siky or Siky.
The Spirit and you ask theologian what's the difference between the soul and the Spirit
and you won't be able to tell you, but it's very clear in St Paul's writings.
So the point is that the Ruach is the divine in the creature by virtue of which we are
sons of or of the nature of God.
The manifestations of the divine, this discovery is the gospel, that is the good news.
But this has been perpetually repressed throughout the history of Western religion, because
all Western religions have taken the form of celestial monarchies.
Therefore I have discouraged democracy in the kingdom of heaven.
Until as a consequence of the teaching of the German and Flamish mystics in the 15th century,
there began to be such movements as the Anabaptists, the brothers of the free spirit, and
the levelers and the Quakers, a spiritual movement which came to this country and founded
a republic and not a monarchy.
And how could you say that a republic is the best form of government?
But you think that the universe is a monarchy.
Obviously, if God is top on a monarchy, monarchy is the best form of government.
But you see ever so many citizens of this republic think they ought to believe that the
universe is a monarchy.
And therefore there are always at odds with the republic.
It is from principally white racist Christians that we have the threat of fascism in
this country, because you see they have a religion which is militant, which is not the
religion of Jesus, which was the realization of divine worship, but the religion about
Jesus, which pedestalizes Him, and which says only this man of all the sons of women was
divine and you had better recognize it.
And so it speaks of itself as the church militant.
The onward Christian soldiers marching us to war, utterly exclusive, convinced in advance
of examining the doctrines of any other religion that is the top religion.
And so it becomes a free-cry religion.
Because as it has made a free-c of Jesus, an unnatural man, it claims uniqueness, not
realizing that what it does teach would be far more credible if it were truly Catholic
that is to say, restated again, the truths which have been known from time immemorial,
which have appeared in all the great cultures of the world.
But even very liberal Protestants still want to say, somehow, so as I suppose to keep
the mission effort going or to pay off the mortgage.
Yes, these other religions are very good.
God has no doubt revealed Himself through Buddha and Lao Dzeh, but now obviously it is
a matter of temperament.
You can be loyal to Jesus, just as your loyalty or own country, but you are not serving
your country if you think that it's necessarily the best of all possible countries.
That is doing a disservice to your country.
It is refusing to be critical where criticism is proper.
So of religion, every religion should be self-critical.
Otherwise it soon degenerates into the self-righteous hypocrisy.
If then we can see this.
That Jesus speaks not from the situation of a historical day or six Machina, a kind of weird,
extraordinary event, but he is a voice which joins with other voices that have said in
every place in time, wake up man, wake up and realize who you are.
Now I don't think you see until church is get with that, that they are going to have very
much relevance.
You see, popular Protestantism and Catholicism will tell you nothing about mystical religion.
The message of the preacher, 52 Sundays a year, is dear people be good.
We have heard it at Nasiam or believe in this.
He may occasionally give a sermon on what happens after death or the nature of God, but
basically the sermon is be good.
But how, as St Paul said, to will is present with me, but how to do that which is good,
I find not for the good that I do not, and the evil that I would not, that I do.
How are we going to be changed?
Obviously, there cannot be a vitality of religion without vital religious experience, and
that's something much more than emoting over singing on wood Christian soldiers.
Did you see what happens in our ecclesiastical goings on, is that we run a talking shop?
We pray, we tell God what to do or give advice, as if he didn't know.
We read the scriptures, and remember talking of the Bible.
Jesus said, you searched the scriptures daily for in them you think you have life.
St Paul made some rather funny references about the spirit which give his life and the letter which kills.
I think the Bible ought to be ceremoniously and reverently burned every Easter.
We need it now more because the spirit is with us.
So danger is book, and to worship it is, of course, a far more dangerous idolatry than
bowing down to images of wood and stone, as you can, nobody in his senses can confuse
a wooden image with God, but you can very easily confuse a set of ideas with God, because
constructs are more verified and abstract.
So with this endless talking in church, we can preach, but by and large preaching does nothing,
but excite a sense of anxiety and guilt, and you can't love out of that.
No scolding, no rational demonstration of the right way to behave is going to inspire people
with love.
Something else must happen.
Oh, he said, what are we going to do about it?
You know, have no faith, be quiet, even Quakers aren't quiet.
They sit in meeting and think, these some of them do.
But first thing we are really quiet, we don't think, be absolutely silent through and
we say, well, you would just fall into a blank.
Oh, never tried.
I feel then you see that it's enormously important that church is stopping talking shops.
May become centers of contemplation, what is contemplation, contemplam, it's what you
do in the temple.
You don't come to the temple to chatter, but to be still and know that I am God.
And this is why, if the Christian religion, if the gospel of Christ is to mean anything
at all, instead of just being one of the forgotten religions, along with our serious and
myths right, we must see Christ as the great mystic.
In the proper sense of the word mystic, not someone who has also some magical powers
and understands spirits and so on, mystic, strictly speaking is one who realizes union
with God by whatever name.
This seems to me the crux and message of the gospel.
Coming up in the prayer of Jesus, which some John records, as he speaks over his disciples
praying, that they may be one, even as you father and I are one, that they may be all one.
All realize this divine sunship or oneness basic identity with the eternal energy of the universe
and the love that moves the sun and other stars.
