And the idea of a yana or vehicle comes from the basic notion or image of Buddhism as a raft
for crossing a river.
This shore is ordinary everyday consciousness, such as we have mainly the consciousness
of being an ego or a sensitive mind locked up inside a mortal body, a consciousness
of being you in particular and nobody else.
The other shore is release or near-vana, a word which means literally blow out as one says
in heaving a sigh of relief, near-vana is never, never, never to be interpreted as a state
of extinction or a kind of consciousness in which you are absorbed into an infinitely
formless luminous ocean, which could best be described as purple jello, but luminous,
you know, kind of spiritual horrors.
It isn't meant to be that at all.
Near-vana has certain many senses, but the primary meaning of it is that it's this everyday
life just as we have it now, but seen and understood and felt in a very, very different way.
Buddhism is called in general a Dharma and this word is often mistranslated as the
law.
It's better translated as the doctrine and still better translated as the method and the
Dharma is formulated originally by the Buddha who was the son of a North Indian raja living
very close to Nepal who was thriving shortly after 600 BC.
The word Buddha is a title, the proper name of this individual was Gautama Siddhartha and
the word Buddha means the awakened one from the Sanskrit root Buddha, the U.D.H., which
means to wake or to know, so we could say Buddha means the man who woke up and the
Buddha was a very, very skillful psychologist.
He is in a way the first psychotherapist in history, a man of tremendous understanding of the
wild and deviousness of the human mind.
Buddhism is made to be easily understood, everything is numbered so to remember it.
And the basis of Buddhism are what I call the four noble truths.
The first one is the truth about suffering.
The second, the truth about the cause of suffering.
The third, the truth about the ceasing of suffering and the fourth, the truth about the
way to the ceasing of suffering.
So let's go back to the beginning, suffering.
The Sanskrit word is Dukha, D-U-H, K-H-A, Dukha.
It means suffering in the widest possible sense about chronic suffering.
Chronic frustration is probably as good a translation as any.
Chronic frustration.
And the Buddhism says the life of mankind and of animals, indeed also of angels, if
you believe in angels, is characterized by chronic frustration.
And so that constitutes the problem, if any one of you says, I have a problem.
I'd don't suppose you would be here if you didn't in some way have a problem.
Well, that's Dukha.
Now, the next thing is the cause of it.
The cause of it is called Trishna, T-R-I-S-H-N-A.
Trishna is a Sanskrit word that is the root of our word first, first, but more exactly
craving or clutching or desiring.
Because of craving or of clutching in us, we create suffering.
So in turn, this second truth includes that behind Trishna, there lies another thing called
ignorance, avidya, A, V, I, D, Y, A.
Non-Vision, we see Vidya, Vid in Sanskrit, is the root of the Latin Vidya, and of our
vision.
And in front of the word is non, as we say, atheist is a non-theist.
So avidya is not seeing ignorance or better ignorance, because our mind as it functions
consciously is a method of attending to different and particular areas of experience one
after another one at a time.
When you focus your consciousness on a particular area, you ignore everything else.
That is why, to know, is at the same time to ignore.
Because of that, there arises Trishna or craving.
Why?
Because if you ignore what you really know, you come to imagine that you are separate from
the rest of the universe, and that you are alone.
And therefore you begin to crave to thirst for, you develop an anxiety to survive, because
you think if you are separate, if you are not the whole works, you are going to die, actually
you are not going to die at all.
You are simply going to stop doing one thing and start doing something else.
When you die in the ordinary way, you just stop doing this thing called Alan Watts.
What you do is something else.
Later, later, man, you know, like that.
And it is nothing to worry about at all.
Only if you are going to totally lock up in the illusion that you are only this, then you
begin to be frightened and anxious, and that creates thirst.
So if you can get rid of ignorance, ignorance, and widen your mind out so as to see the
other side of the picture, then you can stop craving.
That doesn't mean to say you won't enjoy your dinner anymore, and that it won't be nice
to make love to girls or anything like that.
It doesn't mean that at all.
It means you are enjoying your dinner and making love, and generally enjoying the senses
and all the experience, that only becomes an obstacle to you.
If you cling to that in order to save yourself, but if you don't need to save yourself,
you can enjoy life just as much as ever.
You don't have to be a puritan.
So then that state of letting go instead of clinging to everything, supposing you know
you are in business, and you have to make money and keep a family supported or something
like that.
You know, thing is do that.
But don't let it get you down.
Do it about the Hindus called Nishkama karma.
Nishkama means passionless karma activity, and that means doing all the things that one
would do in life, one's business, one's occupation, et cetera, et cetera.
But doing it without taking it seriously, do it as a game.
Then everybody who depends on you will like it much better, because if you take it seriously,
they will be feeling guilty because they will say, oh dear, Papa absolutely knocks himself
out to work for us to see, and they all get miserable, and they go on, they live their
lives out of the sense of duty, which is a dreadful thing to do.
So that's Nirvana, you see, to live in a let go way.
Then the fourth noble truth describes the way the method of realizing Nirvana.
And that's called the noble eightfold path.
The eightfold path is a series of eight human activities such as understanding or view, effort,
education, or occupation, speaking, conduct, et cetera, and they're all prefaced by the
Sanskrit word Samyak, which is very difficult to translate.
Most people translate it right in the sense of correct, but this is an incomplete translation.
The word Sam, the root Sam, in Sanskrit, is the same as our word Sam, through the Latin
summa, and Sam, of course, the sum of things means completion, but it also has the sense
of balanced or middle-waid, not W-8EI-G-H, but W-A-Y-E-D, middle-waid, as Buddhism is called
the middle-waid, and we'll find out a great deal about that later, but the thing that
you must recognize is this.
Buddhism, although when you say right speech, in other words, don't tell lies, let me put
it this way.
Every Buddhist who belongs to the Theravada's tool in the south, expresses the fact that
he is a Buddhist by reciting a certain formula, and it's called Tisarana and Panchasila.
This is I'm talking Paulina, I'm not Sanskrit.
Tisarana means the three refuges, Panchasila, the five precepts, and they put their hands
together like this and say, but Dham Saranangatami, Dham Saranangatami, Saranangatami,
that means I take refuge in Buddha, I take refuge in the method, the Dhamma, I take refuge
in the Sangha, which means the fraternity of the followers of Buddha.
Then he goes on and he takes the five precepts, pāna, tipāta, vēramani, sikha, padang, samadhyāmi,
and this precepts one after another, I promise to abstain from taking from life, taking
life.
Adina dāna vēramani, I promise to abstain from taking what is not given.
Amisumitya hara, I promise to abstain from exploiting my passions.
Mūsa vāda vēramani, I promise to abstain from false speech.
Sūra, mēri, amadhyāpāmadatana, I promise to abstain from getting intoxicated by
a list of various dooses.
Now that this, every Buddhist in the Southern School says,
Mahayānast have a different formula.
Well, this is the method, and the method, the Dhamma, is therefore a moral law.
Just like the Ten Commandments, but it isn't.
It's nothing, it's quite different.
You see, you don't take the five precepts in obedience to a royal edict.
You take them upon yourself, and there is a very special reason for doing so.
How can you fulfill the precept not to take life?
Every day you eat, even if you're a vegetarian, you must take life.
And so on.
Now, therefore understand this, and this is absolutely fundamental to an understanding
of Buddhism.
Buddhism is a method, it is not a doctrine.
Buddhism is a dialogue, and what it states at the beginning is not necessarily what
it would state at the end.
The method of Buddhism is first of all, a relationship between a teacher and a student.
The student creates the teacher by raising a problem, and going to someone about it.
You see, now if he chooses wisely, you see, he will find this if there's a Buddha
around to use as the teacher.
And then he says to the Buddha, my problem is that I suffer.
And I want to escape from suffering.
So the Buddha replies, suffering is caused by desire, by Trishna, by craving.
If you can stop desiring, then you will solve your problem.
Go away and try to stop desiring.
And he gives him some methods.
How to practice meditation, and to make his mind calm and still to see if he can stop
desiring.
The student goes away and practices this.
Then he comes back to the teacher and says, but I can't stop desiring not to desire.
What am I to do about that?
So the teacher says, try then to stop desiring not to desire.
Now, you can see where this is going to land up, or he might put it in this way.
All right, if you can't completely stop desiring, do a middle way.
That is to say stop desiring as much as you can stop desiring.
And don't desire to stop any more desire than you can stop.
See how that's going to go?
Because he keeps coming back.
Because what the teacher has done in saying stop desiring,
he has given his student what in Zen Buddhism is called a coan.
This is a Japanese word that means a meditation problem.
Or more strictly, it means the same thing as case means in law.
Because coans are usually based on anecdotes and incidents of the old masters cases, precedents.
That coan, the function of a coan, is a challenge for meditation.
Well, who is it that desire not to desire?
Who is it that wants to escape from suffering?
And here we get to a methodological difference between Hinduism and Buddhism on the question of who are you.
The Hindu says, you yourself, he calls Atman, A.T.M.A.N.
The Self.
And he says, now, strive to know the Self.
Realize, I am not my body because I can be aware of my body.
I am not my thoughts because I can be aware of my thoughts.
I am not my feelings for the same reason.
I am not my mind, et cetera, because I can be aware of it.
Therefore, I really am other than above transcending all these finite aspects of me.
Now, the Buddhist has a critique of that.
He says, why do you try to escape from yourself as a body?
The reason is your body falls apart and you want to escape from it.
Why do you want to disidentify yourself from your emotions?
The reason is that your emotions are uncomfortable and you want to escape from them.
You don't want to have to be afraid.
You don't want to have to be in grief or anger.
And love even is too much.
You see, it involves you in suffering because if you love someone, you have a hostage to fortune.
So the Buddhist says, the reason why you believe you are the Atman, the Eternal Self,
which in turn is the Brahman, the Self of the Holy Universe,
is that you don't want to lose your damn ego.
And if you can fix your ego and put it in the safety posit box of the Lord,
you think you've still got yourself.
You haven't really let go.
So the Buddha said, there isn't any Atman.
You talk the doctrine of Anatman, non-self.
Your ego is unreal and is a matter of fact, there's nothing you can cling to.
No refuge, really.
Just let go, man.
No salvation, no safety, nothing anywhere.
You see, how clever that was.
You see?
Because he, what he was really saying is, any Atman that you could cling to,
who I think about or believe in, wouldn't be the real one.
This is the accurate sense of the original documents of the Buddha's teaching.
If you carefully go through it, that's what he's saying.
He's not saying that there isn't the Atman or the Brahman.
Is there anyone you could conceive wouldn't be it?
Anyone you believed in would be the wrong one.
Because believing is clinging still.
There's no salvation through believing.
There's only salvation through knowledge.
And even then, the highest knowledge is non-knowledge.
And here he agrees with the Hindus who say in the Upanishads,
in the Kena Upanishad, if you think that you know Brahman, you do not know him.
But if you know that you do not know the Brahman, you truly know.
Why?
Well, that's very simple.
If you really are it, you don't need to believe in it.
And you don't need to know it just as your eyes don't need to look at themselves.
You see?
So that's the difference of method in Buddhism.
Now understand the method, the method is a dialogue.
And the so-called teachings of Buddhism are the first opening gambits in the dialogue.
And when they say you cannot understand Buddhism out of books,
the reason is that the books only give you the opening gambits.
Then having read the book, you have to go on with the method.
Now you can go on with the method without a formal teacher.
That is to say, you can conduct the dialogue with yourself,
or with life.
You have to explore and experiment on such things as,
could one possibly not desire, could one possibly concentrate the mind perfectly,
could one possibly do this that and the other.
And you have to work with it, you see.
So that you understand the later things that come after trying these experiments.
These later things are the heart of Buddhism.
So then shortly after the Buddha's time,
the practice of Buddhism continued as a tremendous ongoing dialogue among the various followers.
And eventually they established the great universities,
such as there was at a place called Nalanda in Northern India.
This discourse was going on,
and if you looked at it superficially,
you might think it was nothing but an extremely intellectual bull session,
where philosophers were out witting each other.
Actually, the process that was going on was this,
that the teacher or guru, in every case,
was examining students as to their beliefs and theories and destroying their beliefs.
Showing that any belief that you would propose any idea about yourself,
for about the universe that you want a cling to,
and make something of use for a crouch, a prop, a security, a teacher, demolishes it.
This is how the dialogue works.
Until you are left with not a thing to hang onto.
Any religion you might propose, even atheism, they'll tear up.
Agnosticism, they'll destroy.
Any kind of belief, they're experts in demolition,
so that they finally get you to the point where you've got nothing left to hang onto.
But then you're free.
Because you're it, you see.
Once you're hanging onto things, you put it somewhere else,
you see, something I can grab.
And even when you think as an idea, then I'm it,
you're still hanging onto that, they're going to knock that one down.
So when you're left without anything at all,
you've seen the point.
Now that's the method of the dialogue, essentially.
That is the dilemma.
And all Buddhists make jokes about it.
Buddha says in the Darwin Sutra, you see,
when I attained complete perfect unsuppressed awakening,
I didn't obtain anything.
Because it's like to use a metaphor that is used in these scriptures,
it's like using an empty fist to deceive a child.
So you know, you say to a child, what have I got here?
A child gets interested in me, didn't they?
Once to find out, you hide it, a child,
perhaps all over, you can't get up your fist.
And finally, you do let him get it, and there's nothing in it.
Many of the problems that are now being discussed
by modern logicians are unbeknownst to them
are already in the ancient Indian books.
Problems of semantics, problems of meaning,
problems of nature of time and of memory.
All these were discussed with very, very meticulous,
scholarly sophistication.
So that it is my opinion, that this was a very, very fertile period
of human history, and that the philosophy in which
it eventually emerged, the philosophy of Mahayana Buddhism,
is, as yet, the most mature and really intelligent theory
of human life and of the cosmos that man has ever devised.
It is characteristic of this point of view,
that it adheres to the middle way.
And the middle way doesn't mean moderation.
It means the bringing together of opposites,
of what we might call in our world, spirit and matter,
mind and body, mysticism and sensuality.
Unity and multiplicity, conformity and individualism,
all these things are marvelously wedded together
in the worldview of Mahayana.
And fundamental to Mahayana Buddhism is the idea of what
is called the Bodhisattva.
Bodhisattva means a person who has as his essence,
Sapa, Bodhi, awakening.
And it's usually used to mean a potential Buddha.
Someone who is as it were just about to become a Buddha.
That was the original sense.
And so the part of the Pali Canon is a book called
the Jata Kamala, the tales of the Buddha's previous lives.
How he behaved when he was an animal.
How he behaved when he was a man long before he became Buddha.
And in all these stories, he is represented
as sacrificing himself for the benefit of other beings.
But since he had not yet become a fully fledged Buddha,
he's called in these stories of Bodhisattva.
That really means a potential Buddha.
But the point is that as a potential Buddha, as a Bodhisattva,
he has always involved in situations where
he's feeding himself for the hungry tigers and so on.
Now in the course of time, the term Bodhisattva
underwent a transformation.
A Bodhisattva materials and becomes a Buddha.
And what does that mean, popularly, it means
that whoever is fully awakened to the way things are
is delivered from any necessity to be involved in the world anymore.
In other words, you can go on to a transcendent level of being
where time is abolished, where all times are now,
where there are no problems, whether it is perpetual,
eternal peace, Nirvana in the sense of the word
Parinya Vana means beyond Nirvana, super Nirvana.
So that if you are fed up with this thing,
and you don't want to play the game of height and seek any more,
you can go in the Parinya Vana state
and be in total serenity.
However, and again, I'm talking the language of popular Buddhism.
A person who stands on the threshold of that peace can turn back
and say, I won't be a Buddha.
I'll be a Bodhisattva.
I won't make the final attained because I would like to go back
into the world of manifestation, they call sanghsara,
go back into that world and work for their liberation.
So then when a Mahayana Buddhist does his formula for Pujayana,
he says, sentient beings are numberless.
I take a vow to save them.
Deluding passions are inexhaustible.
Nope, there's inexhaustible.
I take a vow to destroy them.
The gates of the method, the Dharma are manifold.
I take a vow to enter them.
The Buddha way is supreme.
I take a vow to complete it.
All this is impossible.
You see, numberless sentient beings because their numberless can never be delivered.
Deluding passions which are inexhaustible can never be eradicated.
So this then Mahayana, you know, they go,
shu joumu henshegang no bhan no mujenshegang dang,
hangan muryoushegangyakku, but stoumu jousegang jou.
And that's their formula.
The bodhisattva who returns into the world and becomes involved again
is in fact regarded as a superior kind of being
to the one who gets out of it.
The person who gets out of the rat race
and enters into eternal peace is called Pratyeka Buddha,
which means private Buddha.
Buddha who does not teach, who does not help others,
and in Mahayana literature that is almost a term of abuse.
Pratyeka Buddha.
Pratyeka Buddha is a class with unbelievers and heretics and infidels and fools.
But the great thing is the bodhisattva.
All beings are thought of in popular Buddhism
as constantly reincarnating, again and again and again and again
into the round of existence, helplessly because they still desire.
Therefore, drawn back into the cycle.
The bodhisattva goes back into the cycle with his eyes wide open voluntarily
and allows himself to be sucked in.
And this is normally interpreted as an act of supreme compassion
and bodhisattva can assume any guides.
They can get furiously angry if necessary
in order to discourage evil beings.
Even could assume the role of a prostitute
and live that way so as to deliver beings at that level of life.
Could become an animal, could become an insect,
become a maggot, anything, or deliberately and in full consciousness
to carry on the work of the deliverance of all beings.
Now that's the way the popular mind understands it.
And therefore, the bodhisattvas are all revered and respected
and worshiped and looked upon as gods as we look upon God in the West
and as saviors as the Christian looked upon Jesus.
But underneath this myth, there is a profound
philosophical idea and that is this.
It goes back to the Hindu philosophy of
Advaita and non-duality.
Namely, the apparent dualism of I and Vau
of the Noah and the Noah and the Noah and the Subject and the Object is unreal.
And so also, the apparent duality between
Maya, the world illusion and reality is unreal.
The apparent duality or difference between
the enlightened and the ignorant person is unreal.
So the apparent duality of bondage and deliverance or liberation is unreal.
The wise, the perfectly wise man, is the one who realizes vividly
that the ideal place is the place where you are.
If this isn't impossible thing to put in words,
the nearest I could get to it would be to say
that if you could see this moment
that you need nothing beyond this moment, now sitting here,
irrespective of anything I might be saying to you,
of any ideas you might have rattling around in your brains,
that here and now is the absolute
witch, then witch, there is no witcher.
Only we prevent ourselves from seeing this,
because we're always saying, well, there ought to be something more
on, amontime missing, something somehow.
Oh, nobody sees it.
Now, then also the most far out form of Mahayana Buddhism
is called the Pure Land School,
Jo-do Shinshu, Jo-do means Pure Land Shinshu true sect.
And this is based on the idea that there was in
the measurably past ages a great bodhisattva called Amitabha.
And he made a vow that he would never never become a Buddha,
unless any being who repeated his name
would automatically at death be born into the Pure Land
over which he presides, that's the kind of paradise.
He did become a Buddha, and so the vow works.
All you have to do is to repeat the name of Amitabha,
and this will assure the fact that without any further effort on your part,
you will be reborn in his paradise when you die,
and then that paradise becoming a Buddha is a cinch.
There are no problems there.
The western paradise, you see, is a some kind of a level of consciousness,
but it's represented as fact as a glorious place.
You can see the pictures of it in Koyasan, wonderful pictures,
where the Buddha Amitabha, who is actually a Persian figure,
he's related to Ahora Mazda,
and he means boundless light, and the dibutts at Kamakura,
that enormous bronze Buddha in the open air, is Amitabha.
So there he sits surrounded with his court,
and this court is full of obsarres,
and obsarres are beautiful girls, playing lutes,
and as you are born into the paradise, what happens when you die,
is you discover yourself inside a lotus,
and the lotus goes, pot, and there you find yourself sitting,
coming out of the water,
and here are the clouds in front of you are the obsarres sitting,
strumming their lutes with the most sensuous, beautiful faces, see,
and to get this, all you have to do is say the name
of Amitabha.
The formula is Namuamida, buddh.
Namuamida budds, and you can get this fast,
Namuamida budds.

Namuamida budds.
Namuamida budds.
Namuamida budds.
It said, any minute time to see.
So you're quite sure it's going to happen,
but actually you only have to sit once,
and you mustn't make any effort to gain this reward,
because that would be spiritual pride.
Your karma, you see, your bad deeds,
your awful past, is so bad that anything good you try to do
is done with a selfish motive, and therefore doesn't
affect your deliverance.
Therefore, the only way to get deliverance is to put faith
in the power of this Amitabha buddha,
and to accept it as a free gift, and to take it
by doing the most absurd thing, saying Namuamida budds, isn't it?
Don't even worry whether you have to have faith in this,
because trying to have faith is also spiritual pride.
It doesn't matter whether you have faith or whether you don't.
The thing works anyway, so just say Namuamida budds.
Now that's the most popular form of Buddhism in Asia.
The two most vast temples in Kyoto,
the initiating Higashi-Honganji temples represent this sect,
and everybody loves Amitabha.
Amida, they call him in Japan.
Boundless light, infinite Buddha of compassion.
Sitting there with us, and jelly expression on his face,
it's all right, boys to say my name.
It's all you have to do.
So when we add together, prayer wheels,
Namuamida budds, they call it nimbuts,
so that means remembering Buddha, bookcases,
and all these things, where you just have to put it up,
and the work is done for you.
Then wouldn't we Western, as say,
especially if we are Protestants?
Oh, what a scoundrel thing that is,
what an awful degradation of religion,
what an avoidance of the moral challenge and the effort
and everything that is required.
Is this what the Bodhisattva doctrine
of infinite compassion deteriorates into?
Now you see, there is a profound aspect to all that.
Just as the, there is the diamond and the ice,
as we were talking about this morning,
just as there is desperation and despair,
Nirvana, desperation and despair of the horrors.
So there are two ways of looking at this,
and nothing to do, no effort to make idea,
depending completely on the Savior.
For who is Amitabha?
Popularly, Amitabha is somebody else.
He is some great compassionate being
who looks after you.
He's satirically, Amitabha is your own nature.
Amitabha is your real self.
The inmost boundless light,
that is the root and ground of your own consciousness.
You don't need to do anything to be that.
You are that.
And saying Nembutzu's is simply a symbolical way
of pointing out that you don't have to become this, you are it.
And Nembutzu, therefore, and it's deep aside, builds up
a special kind of sage, which they call Mio-Konin.
Mio-Konin in Japanese means a marvelous fine man.
But the Mio-Konin is a special type of personality
who corresponds in the West to the Holy Fool
in Russian spirituality, or to something
like the Franciscan in Catholic spirituality.
Mio-Konin's, well, I'll tell you some Mio-Konin stories.
That's the best way to indicate their character.
One day, Mio-Konin was traveling and it stopped
in a Buddhist temple overnight.
And he went up to the sanctuary where they have all these big
cushions, like here, you know, for the priest to sit on.
And he arranged the cushions and a pile on the floor
and went to sleep on them.
In the morning, the priest came in and saw this tramp sleeping.
Then what are you doing here, desecrating the sanctuary
by sleeping on the cushions and so on, right in front of the altar?
And then Mio-Konin looked at him in astonishment and said,
he said, why you must be a stranger here, you can't belong
to the family.
In Japanese, when you want to say, the thing is just the way it is.
You call it Sonoma.
So as a Hiku poem, which says, weeds in the rice field, cut them
down, Sonoma fertiliser.
And Sonoma means reality.
Just the way it is, just like that.
Now there's an expression of parallel expression,
Konoma, Konoma means I just as I am.
Just little me, you know, like that with no frills, no pretence.
Except the dye in the water, the water in the water,
the water in the water, the water in the water, the water in the water.
And then the water in the water, the water in the water,
except the dye naturally have some pretence.
That's part of Konoma.
And the Mio-Konin is the man you see who realizes that he, Konoma,
just as I am, I'm Buddha, I'm delivered by Amitabha,
because Amitabha is my real nature.
And if you really know that, you see, that makes you a Mio-Konin.
But be aware of the fact that you could entirely miss the point
and become a monkey, instead, by saying, I'm all right, just as I am.
And therefore, I'm going to rub it in.
And I'm going to be going around parading my unregenerate nature,
because this is Buddha too, you see.
The fellow who does that doesn't really know that it's okay.
He's doing too much, he's coming on too strong.
The other people who are always beating themselves, they're doing the opposite error, you see,
the middle way, right down the center, is where you don't have to do a thing to justify yourself.
And you don't have to justify not justifying yourself, which is the mistake that most
beat nicks make, they just define not justifying themselves, and go too far.
So you see there's something quite fascinating and tricky in this doctrine of the great Bodhisattva
Amitabha, who saves you just as you are, who delivers you from bondage, just as you are,
and you only have to say no more Amitabha.
Fascinating.
But that is the principle of Mahayana.
And that is, you see, your acceptance of yourself as you are.
Is the same thing as coming to live now as you are, you see now is as you are, in the moment.
But you can't come to now and you can't accept yourself.
On purpose, because the moment you do that, you're doing something unnecessary.
You're doing a little bit more, that's what they call in Zen legs on a snake or a beard on a unit.
You've overdone it, you see, how can you
neither do something about it, nor do nothing about it as if that was something you had to do.
You see, this is the same problem as originally posed in Buddhism.
How do you cease from desiring?
Because when I try to cease from desiring, I am desiring not to desire.
You see this?
All of this is a, what is called Upaya or skillful device.
To slow you down, so that you can really be here.
By seeing that there is nowhere else you can be.
You don't have to come to now where else can you be?
It isn't a task, it isn't a contest of the Greeks called Agon, agony, a contest.
There's nowhere else to be, so they say Nirvana is no other than Sangsara.
This show is really the same as the other show.
It's not a, so if you look for this Lankovatar sutras,
if you look to try and get Nirvana in order to escape suffering and being reborn,
that's not Nirvana at all.
