Now, you know those people you've just been listening to, chanting the sutras on
Koyasan, which is the sort of ultimate center retreat in a sanctuary of Japanese
practice of Vajrayana, Mahayana Buddhism. Our bunch of boys who are just like
American college boys who play football and they haven't the faintest idea what they're doing
not today. They're doing this because their fathers have sent them there, their
fathers own temples and they've got to carry on their fathers tradition because
after all the family business has to go on and they have no more idea what this
is all about than the men in the moon. And you and I can sit here and we could
get swinging with this music, we could dance to it and we could go very far out on
it, which was what you were originally supposed to do. And for them it's a chore.
It's a thing you have to get up for at five o'clock in the morning and you have
to memorize all this and you have to get it exactly right and do it. And they've
completely forgotten what it was all about. But it was originally there. It's a
funny thing how this happens, you see. But you see how I was explaining to you this
morning, how we have a rhythm between remembering and not remembering. You remember
long enough to know the chore there because if you don't remember nothing makes any impression
upon you therefore you're not there. But then when memory gets too much and you're too
much there then you have to realize that all memory is an illusion that there is nothing
except the present moment. And there is no future as equally, no past. And then you're
liberated. But when you get liberated you have to come back in and play memory again.
There's a cleaning process in other words you wipe off the blackboard and then you start writing
again and then you wipe it off and then you start writing again. And this is the process where
by life is kept going. So in the same way with these people they have come to a point
in the historical development of their way of life where they're in number too much.
It's not new to them. And all this therefore becomes what we call going through the motions.
And so this is the same paradox that I was talking about this morning
that the echo which is memory is simultaneously what tells you you exist and what traps you.
So in the sense that it tells you you exist it's an advantage to the extent that it traps you
it's a debt. You're in debt. You should be thankful. Somebody gave it to you.
Ultimately in the Judeo-Christian tradition the Lord God did it all for you and you should be thankful.
And say anything bad that I did was from me. Do you God anything good that I did was from you?
You see? What a marvelous mix up that is. But all I'm saying is this there is a point in
in all this development where you have to say to people please come off it.
In other words these boys here in Koyosan I was aching to know enough Japanese to say to them.
Do you realize what a great thing you have here? Couldn't you possibly enjoy it for a few minutes
and let's get together and all join hands around here and go through this again these citrus
and really make it. So I'm talking to you about the same process of what has been called
flip flop ability whereby we switch from one attitude to another one situation to another and this
pulse switch situation is the very nature of existence that's why your heart does that.
That's why all sounds, all light everything is going, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom,
see and so because of that, boom, you know you're here.
We're not. I've been trying to show how this game has its own in a meaning.
So finally we've got to come around to one form of Mahayana that I haven't really discussed at
all to complete the whole scene which is what is called the School of the Pure Land and this
is the most popular form of Mahayana Buddhism in the Far East. In China, in Japan, everywhere
the the multitudes go for this kind and it's all under the presiding image of the
one of those Johnny Buddhas called Amitabha whose name means boundless light and who is a sort of
sub-divisional aspect of Mahavirokana who is the great son Buddha and is therefore probably derived
historically from Ahura Mazda from Persia, the great son God of the Mazdaians and the Passes.
But although that may have been what set it all off, it has been greatly transformed
by being canonized through Buddhism. Now you have all seen photographs of the Buddha at Kamakura,
the dibutts that enormous bronze figure that sits in a beautiful park with pine trees,
the temple having long been demolished by a tidal wave for which thanks be to God
because if it hadn't been for the tidal wave nobody would ever have really seen this figure.
But there is at Kamakura this huge bronze figure it's about 42 feet high
and here this creature sits surrounded by a great business, thousands of school children are
all the time on tours, streaming by photographers, people selling this that and the other souvenirs,
exhibitions of dwarf trees and everything for all going on around and here this thing sits
and looks down forever and nothing can hush it. I mean let's put it this way. It hushes everything
that no matter how much turmoil of children and etc is going on in this park, this huge
face presides over everything and you cannot ignore it, it sedues you into peace without
doing it in an authoritative way, it doesn't say to you shut up, it just is so peaceful that you cannot
help catching the infection of peace that comes from this figure and this is the figure of Amida
Amitaba. Not the historical Shaka Muni go to my Buddha living in India but one of the
Johnny Buddhas who is not manifested in the world. Now the religion connected with this figure is
called Pureland, Jodo in Japanese, Shinshu, the true sect of the Pureland. It comes
again the origins are always in India but the Japanese under the genius of Honen and Shinran
who were medieval Buddhist saints developed their own special variety of it.
And this is a very strange religion because it takes its basis as follows. We are living now
in the most decadent period of history. That's what they say and this comes back from the
Hindu idea that this is the Kali Yuga, this is the end of time where everything is completely
fouled up and this started in about 3000 BC, February the 23rd, 23BC, the Kali Yuga began
and it's got to last yet for 5000 years and then everything will fall apart. The universe will
disappear out of sheer failure so that now nobody can be virtuous because everybody who tries to
be virtuous in this epoch of the world is merely showing off. It's not really pure, it's just
pretending you're virtuous, it's a big act. In other words so you give money to charity,
not because you really love the people you're giving money to but because you are under a sense of
guilt and you really want to. And therefore because of that in inscapable, bad motivation,
nobody can possibly liberate themselves from the chains of karma. The more you try to get out
of your karma that is to say you're conditioning, your bondage to your past, the more you simply
get yourself involved in it. And therefore all human beings living in the end time of the Kali Yuga
or what the Japanese call Mappo are just hopeless, hopelessly selfish. So in this predicament
you cannot rely on Jiriki that means your own power to get out, to get liberated from self.
You have to rely on Tariki, which is the power of something else all together than you, something
quite different. So in the Jodo Shinshu sect, the Tariki, the other power,
is represented in the form of Amitabha, or Japanese say Amida, this great beneficent
Buddha figure, who everybody loves. And he's so strangely different from any kind of
authoritarian god figure that we have in the West. Amida doesn't bombinate.
He sits there serenely, quiet. He doesn't preach. And all you have to do is to say his name
in the formula, Namu Amida buts, which means Namu name Amida buts of Amida Buddha. Namu Amida buts.
And all you have to do is to say that formula. And after death you will be reborn in a special
paradise called Sukhavati, which is Jodo, the Pure Land, where becoming enlightened is a cinch.
It has none of the difficulties surrounding it that we have in our ordinary life today.
Everybody born in the Pure Land is born in the inside of a lotus. There's a huge lotus pond
in front of where Amida sits with all his attendants. And the lotus has come up when they go
pop. There's the bud breaks. And every time it goes pop like this there's a new little being in there,
who is somebody who said the formula Namu Amida buts. And those are human beings when
are sitting on lotus's like butters. And you should see you go to Koyasan and they have a great
painting there in their museum of what it's like to arrive there. They have a huge panorama
of Amitabha and all his attendants and especially the Absara and she looks at you with lovely
longing eyes. And so this is welcome to Amida's paradise where you will all sit on lotus's
and be Buddhas without any difficulty. But the point is all you have to do to get there
is to say Namu Amida buts. You don't even have to believe that it works.
Now that is the religion of most Japanese Buddhists believe it or not.
In other words, if you, if you, if you, of course, if you really get this and the field
that's really going to happen to you, you'll be grateful and you'll try to help other people
and be a Bodhisattva and so on and you know, be generally helpful around the scene.
But the whole idea is that you cannot do it by your own effort. And if the moment you think you
can do it by your own effort, you're a phony, you have instead to go completely with the other
to disown your own power and capability of being virtuous, unselfish, etc.
So then this kind of religion develops a peculiar kind of saint and they call these people
Mio-konin, Mio means wonderful, core means fine, in means man or person. There can be a woman,
Mio-konin does not sexually restricted to men. So Mio-konin is a very special kind of character.
There are stories told about Mio-konin. There is one, for example, a traveling man who comes
to a temple during the course of the night and walks in and he takes the sacred cushions on which
the priest sits and arranges them right in the front of the altar and goes to sleep. In the morning,
the priest comes in and says, what's going on here? And Mio-konin looks at him, says,
oh, you must be a stranger, you belong to the family. Another time,
he had great ability for calligraphy, doing beautiful writing and people were always trying to
get his calligraphy from it and he was cagey about it. It wasn't so easy to get it. So one day a very,
very great man invited him for dinner and again left him alone in a reception room where there
was stretched out on the floor, some absolutely gorgeous paper with ink and brushes just waiting
there. And he got so fascinated but he just couldn't resist. And I like a child. He simply couldn't
resist doing his calligraphy on that piece of paper and suddenly as he realized he had done it,
that he had spoiled this gorgeous paper, you know, which was incredibly expensive.
The host walked in and he apologised, he said, really, I don't know what to do, like.
So sorry, I couldn't resist the temptation to make some things on this beautiful paper.
The host said, oh, please don't worry about that. Because he had now possessed himself of a
priceless object of a heart, this man's work today sells for thousands and thousands of dollars.
So this is the spirit. I'm telling these anecdotes to try and illustrate the spirit of what's
called a meal Conan. Somebody in the swing of realizing that all the very great thing in life
is not your own doing, that it comes from the side of things, the flip, in other words, of experience,
that you call other. There are some people who see you believe it comes from this split
in experience who call yourself, that's the gerry key people. The tari key people believe it comes from
the other. But now what happens is this. When you penetrate deeply into the doctrines of the Pureland school,
the simple people believe that there really is amitababuddha sitting on his golden lotus surrounded
by all those absaras. Exactly from Japan, 108,000 miles to the west, there is a paradise where
all those people sit and where you will be reborn when you die. And the simple priests of the
sect in the country villages today still insist that that's what you should believe.
But the sophisticated priests don't believe that at all. They know that amitababuddha is in you,
only it is that side of you which you don't define as you. When you say,
I have a body, you're instead of saying, I am a body. That's because you feel that your body
happens to you. That it's something you got mixed up with that was given to you by your parents.
You don't say, I beat my heart on purpose. You feel that your heart is something that happens to you.
So all that side of things that you experience as a passive recipient of it is Tariqi.
But in all this, who are you? Who is the recipient of these gifts?
Don't you see that self and other go together? That you don't need to cling to yourself because
you have everything you called other and that's you too. But you only realize this if you
explore it. If you go to an extreme, so you can go to the extreme by pursuing the idea of total
courage of letting go of everything of being a true Zen monk and abandoning all your property
and living in a barn and sitting in the middle of the night in the cold and eating rice and
pickles and so on and you can explore liberation that way. That's going to an extreme.
But eventually you will come round to the same point as the person who goes to the other extreme,
which is no effort whatsoever. It comes of itself only. He gets in a kind of buying too.
Because when am I making no effort, even if I say nomuamidabuts, I'm doing something about it.
Now I've got a stop doing saying this nomuamidabuts, not saying nomuamidabuts is so easy,
but it's still a little bit work and I mustn't do any work at all. How can you get to the point
where you don't do any work at all? But you just mustn't do anything and you find yourself
that that is difficult as the other situation was. You see, to do nothing, really do nothing
with perfection is as difficult as to do everything.
