This seminar about birth death and the unborn is going to be a discussion of the Buddhist philosophy
of change.
And I'm going to start out by going into the very tricky and difficult question of the Buddhist
view of birth and death and the doctrine which is ordinarily understood as reincarnation or rebirth.
It's a curious thing that many Westerners who become interested in Hinduism or Buddhism.
Do so because of this idea of reincarnation.
They like it.
It gives a more satisfactory vision of individual history and development than the two possibilities
that would normally be opened to Westerners to believe in.
On the one hand, you've got the choice of the Christian view which is that you live in
this world once and in this four-score years and ten, your eternal fate is settled.
Or you've got the possibility of the materialistic view which is that you only live once
and when you're dead, that's that.
You're a flash of consciousness between two eternal darknesses.
Intelligent people in the Western world never felt very happy about either of these two
prospects.
And therefore there's a certain trackiveness about the idea which seems to be the point
of Buddhism and Hinduism that you are a soul on a pilgrimage and that from some extremely
obscure origin you began as some sort of an immolecule and worked your way up, step by
step through all sorts of forms of life and finally you have the privilege of appearing
in human form and once you've got there you have an opportunity to develop to the highest
spiritual position.
You must remember that according to both Hindu and Buddhist doctrines, the human form
is a very privileged position.
For there are according to both of them because they share a common cosmology, six domains
of beings and if you visualize the wheel of life with its six divisions at the highest
top division, there is the realm of the Deva.
Deva is a word from which we get the word divine and equally the word devil.
Deva means though originally a god or more correctly an angel.
Angel is a better Western translation of Deva than god.
Immediately opposite the Deva, world at the bottom of the circle, there is the Naraka
world of beings in torment, of the absolute, this is the dimension of the world which
is the screaming mimis which is experience in the form of horror.
Deva world is the experience of being in the form of bliss.
And between these two poles there are all kinds of ranges.
There are for example the Ashura's next to the Deva's going clockwise around the wheel
and the Ashura's are, they are a wrathful beings.
Ashura is the incarnation of divine anger.
Then next to the Ashura going around are the animals, all animals whatsoever.
Then again we get to the Naraka at the bottom, the place of the purgatory will call it.
Then coming up again there is the world of the preta who are frustrated beings.
And they are represented iconographically as having very large bellies and very tiny mouths.
That is to say an immense appetite with very little means of satisfying it.
There is sort of spiritual bottleneck.
And then coming up between the preta's and the Deva's is the world of the humans.
And this is understood to represent a sort of little position.
You can be liberated from the human state because the Deva's are too happy to be liberated.
The Ashura's two fears, the animals to dumb, the Naraka's two tormented and the preta's
too frustrated.
You need not take this as a literal account of various kinds of being in the universe.
You can take them simply as a depiction of various states of the human mind.
Of the moods you can go through.
They are all really in your own head as we shall see later on about many other things.
And these are the six worlds of Hindu and Buddhist cosmology.
And the notion is that one reincarnates again and again through the six worlds.
This is the popular idea.
In other words, if you live this human life in a bad way and you become angry,
if you devote your life to fury you will be reincarnated as an Ashura.
If you devote your life to merely living for back and belly, you will be reincarnated as an animal.
If you are horribly cruel to people and so on, you will be reincarnated as a Naraka and so on all around.
But on the other hand, if you do good things in the course of your karma, you will be reincarnated in the Deva world,
or in better and better situations in the human world.
That's the popular understanding and Westerners.
Many of them think, well that's great.
Because this opens up vast vistas of future development,
we can go on in future lives, working out our destinies.
And we can also love to think about who we were before.
When you fall in love with somebody, did you meet before in some past life?
Is this the working out of a karma that is between you and it's very interesting?
But the funny thing is that Hindus and Buddhists, who do believe in rebirth, do so,
not because they like it, but because they feel they have to accept it as a hard fact.
And the whole task of the work of Sardhana or spiritual practice and discipline is to get out of it.
So it always strikes me, it's very funny.
That Westerners take this up because they find it comforting.
But Easterners are always trying to get away from being reborn.
It was so funny once Joseph Campbell told me a story,
that he was sitting with a Vedanta Swami, one of these Vedanta societies, Swami.
And the Swami was saying, oh dear me, he said, you know,
really, the idea of rebirth is so wonderful.
He said, I really, I think this is the most comforting notion.
And Joseph to him, Swami, don't be a damn fool.
What are you talking about?
The idea of rebirth being so comforting.
Don't you realize that that's what you're supposed to get away from?
And the Swami suddenly jumped.
He said, oh yes, of course.
It was like I once had a talk with a Swami.
And he was arguing, you see, that behind all the multiple forms of this world,
there was only a one single divine principle.
And he was going on about this.
I said, Swami, you can't talk like that.
You know very well that the Brahman, the ultimate reality isn't one,
because one has an opposite, which is many, and Brahman has no opposite.
You should speak as a Brahman as the non-dual.
And again, he said, you talk just like a Hindu.
They are funny, you see, because these swamis have accepted
and enormous amount of western feeling.
And the British were responsible for that,
for occupying India so long, and converting its traditions.
Now, it is so curious, all of us, because in Buddhism,
there's still prevails an idea of rebirth.
Very strong among all Buddhist countries.
And yet, Buddhism explicitly denies that there is any individual reincarnating soul.
You see, in Buddhism, there is a doctrine, which is called the three signs of being.
And these three signs of being, well, I should more correctly say,
the Sanskrit word is Phava, BHA, and that means becoming rather than being.
Phava is from the basic root, I think, BH, which is connected with growth.
So, Bhava, becoming the process of change, has three signs.
One is called Duka, D-U-H-K-H-A, Duka, and Sanskrit means frustration.
Sometimes translated suffering, but I think frustration is a more general word,
which is perhaps better.
It's Duka is the opposite of Suka, Suka means sweet.
Duka perhaps means sour.
But in this, in the way it's used, it means frustration as a basic characteristic of living beings.
Because for some reason or other, life is always eventually frustrating.
You desire more than you can ever get, you overreach the possibilities.
And so, to every being, death comes as a collapse and is something unfortunate.
The next sign of being is called Anitya, a, n-i-t-y-a, in Sanskrit, Anitya, which means impermanence.
The opposite word being Nithya, Eternal.
So Anitya is, everything is in flux.
And finally, Anatman, a, n-a-t-m-a-n, Anatman, which means that nothing has its own soul.
Now that's a, sounds to a Christian, a terrible idea, because we use the word soulless, or we say to a person, you have no soul, which means you have no finer feelings.
You have no, you're not a human being, because Christian theology did distinguish between humans and animals by saying that animals have no soul.
Idiots have no soul, they've lost their soul. But you can see at once that there is a complete difference
of the meaning. This is to translate Atman as soul is ridiculous.
Anatman means, basically, that nothing exists.
Well, there's another word in Sanskrit, you have to know, Fabhava, S.V.A. that means one self or one's own,
same as the Latin source, because the V becomes the U.S. Fabhava, Bhabhava, becoming again,
your own becoming, or sometimes it's called your own nature, or self-nature.
And so, what it is saying is that nothing has any real Fabhava, because no individual thing
of any kind exists except in relation to all the other things.
In other words, you are what you are, only because of your relationships to everything else.
And therefore the whole universe is a system of interdependence.
It's just as if, for example, you were to stand two sticks on the ground and lean them against each
other, and they will stand up and form an inverted V, because they lean on each other.
And this is an old thing that they teach children in Japan. But these sticks leaning against each other
form the Chinese character for man, and they say therefore, man cannot exist unless we support each
other. This is the basis of therefore our brotherhood and love. Good social relationships.
But underneath that is the far more profound idea that the universe coheres by everything
depending on everything else. And therefore nothing exists alone. Nothing exists in its own right,
and that's what Anatman means. You do not have an indestructible immortal soul which is just
plain you forever and ever and ever, and is independent of there being anything else at all.
Also, though, this does go along with the idea that there is not some kind of gaseous spook,
some kind of a ferric double astral body, what have you, which outlast the existence of the physical body
and migrates to the next incarnation. So it has always been a puzzle for Buddhist philosophers to
explain how they can at once believe in reincarnation and at the same time deny the existence of
an individual spook, which is independent of the physical frame. And the most subtle discussions
in all Buddhist literature range around this puzzle. The most important text of early Buddhism
is a book called The Questions of King Melinda. This is the Greek Melinda. He is a king in the
succession of Alexander the Great, who ruled in Alexander's Eastern Empire and had long conversations
with the Buddhist sage by the name of Nagasena. And Nagasena tries to explain to the king
how there can be rebirth without anyone who is being reborn. And so this is the problem to
which we address ourselves. How can there be a continuing process without anything carried along
by it? And you will recognize at once that the problem is very largely semantic.
Because it involves our whole idea of continuity.
What, for example, do you mean by a wave? When you see you throw a stone into the water
and from the plop point where the stone goes in a whole lot of rings emerge and they are waves
and they go out. And you can, as it were, look at one of them and follow it. And you say,
I am watching a wave. But what is a wave? You know very well that the water itself,
no volume of water, no specific volume of water is moving outwards from the place where you drop
the pebble. It the water is staying quite still so far as lateral motion is concerned.
But the water is moving up and down. And these up and down movements create the illusion of a
thing called a wave that goes along. Similar to the illusion when you watch a barbers pole revolving,
it seems to be a procession of something that keeps going up from the bottom of the pole to the
top. But actually it is just going around. Now that appearance of something moving when there
is actually the only thing that is going outwards is motion and motion is about as abstract as
you can think. This is the whole root of the Indian idea of Maya, of the world as Maya,
as a construct, as something which shall we say exists only in your mind.
Only we shall have to be very careful what we mean by that. And I'm going to come to that later on in
the seminar. So here is the point. You are delivered from rebirth, this being the purpose of the
spiritual disciplines of Hinduism and Buddhism. As soon as you are relieved of the illusion
that something is going on, continuity. This after this after this after this all linking up
together into a chain. In the famous Zen text called the platform Sutra attributed to Huaynong,
the six-page rock. There is a passage which says, if we allow our thoughts past, present and future,
to link up into a series, we put ourselves under restraint. But on the other hand, if we just
see that there is just this thought and then this thought, you are liberated.
This is an idea which is taken up by T.S. Eliot in his poem The Four Quartets,
where you come to the passage where he says that you are getting on a train.
And you've settled down in the compartment with your newspaper and you're going on a journey.
But the one who arrives at the destination will not be the same person who left the platform in the
beginning. Because you who sit here now are not the same as the people who came in at the door
a little while ago. Just in exactly the same way as the flame of a candle appears to be a constant
flame which we can identify as a thing. But as a matter of fact, it is a stream of hot energy,
which is whatever particles, whatever gaseous molecules are here are going to like this the whole
time flowing upwards and disappearing. The flame is converting the candle wax into gas.
And in exactly the same way as we can see that the flame has an identity. We say it is a flame,
we have a noun for it. We're actually it is a process, it is flaming. And so in just precisely
that way every human being is a process. Just as the flame is the conversion of wax into
gas. So you and I are the conversion of air and water and light and beef steak and milk into
shit and which again converts into something else. We are the flowing vibration through which
all this goes and not for one moment are we the same. So then the meaning of the Buddhist doctrine
is that you who live today are never going to die because the one that's going to die will
not be the youth here now. And likewise the one that's here now was never born. It goes like this.
It is explained by Dogan who was the most fabulous Zen philosopher living around 1200 AD.
When he said the spring does not become the summer and the summer does not become the autumn.
No one would say that spring becomes the summer. There is spring and then there is summer.
And he said in the same way when you burn wood there are ashes but the wood does not become the
ashes. There is wood and then there is ashes. Each is as it were sufficient to itself.
There are as it were so steps. It's like vibrations wave crests. You see where the water doesn't move.
You see what it doesn't move laterally. So in this sense by analogy the spring does not become the summer.
But by watching it you in your mind impose motion on the up and down of the water. And so you say the spring
becomes the summer. So likewise you say the baby becomes the adolescent becomes the man becomes the
chrome becomes the corpse. And the Buddhists say no. These states follow in the same way as the
apparent motion of a wave. And so the word to the wise is live the moment you're in.
There is no other place to be. You will not die and you will never burn.
If you realize, if you see through the illusion, now this may sound as if one were creating a
theory of the universe which is what you might call atomistic. Discontinuous. It is saying the
universe is nothing but point instance. And it all comes down to that. I see that is an extension
of the western philosophy of nominalism. A nominalism is opposed to realism. The nominalists
argue against the realists point of view which is realists say there is such a thing as mankind.
mankind is a reality and every individual human is a special instance of a real, universal substance
called man. The nominalists argue this is abstraction and nonsense. There is no such thing as mankind.
There are only individual people. And of course this has become in the 20th century the ascendant point
of view. There is not really such a thing as the United States of America. That is a political abstraction
that are just the people who live here. But if you take nominers to its logical conclusion,
you'll get to the point where you don't exist at all. A human being, well there is no such thing as
a human being. It's an abstraction. All there is is the molecules that are the cells which infest
your bones. And there's all those further into the nuclear particles and you can say, well that's
all there is, you see. There are just these things. But then you suddenly begin to realize.
There is no end to that way of thinking. Because you could always give an imagination and given
instruments of sufficient subtlety, subdivide any unit of existence of motion of energy into further
subdivisions, further units of measurement. And say, well that we get more real. As we get smaller,
you see, it's simply saying that the smaller things are the more real things. Well that's a ridiculous
argument because you can play it exactly in the opposite direction. You can say, oh no, no, no,
since all small things only exist relatively. That is to say in relation to each other.
There are only real things, the big thing. So all those small particles are relatively unreal.
The only thing that is real is the whole universe. And that's so big that nobody can conceive it.
So do you see all philosophical argument is a game playing with people arguing with each other
in words, playing up and down the scale of arguing as to which level of bits,
collections of bits or bits whatsoever, which one is real?
I've noticed a very funny thing in observing with my experiments with psychedelics.
That psychedelic conversations are absolutely perfect examples of what is going on
and always has been going on in philosophy. People start talking with each other,
having very animated conversations about nothing at all except the processes of grammar.
In other words, let's imagine a conversation in which nothing specific is mentioned.
No proper names are used, no proper nouns. Nothing is being referred to whatsoever.
But all the words that indicate more or less dimensions of quality,
dimensions of quantity, all the operative words say words like to be
to grow, to diminish, to expand, to contract, all these are operant words which can be used with
reference to all kinds of specifics. But they get into conversations where all specifics are
dropped out and only operant words are used and they dance with each other by using these kinds of
words and philosophers are doing exactly the same thing. Philosophy is an intellectual dance
of a game that we play just like it might be go or it might be chess or checkers or poker
where we take these abstractions, the set of cards, 52 to the deck and we play numbers
and orders against each other. Well, philosophers do just the same thing in all their arguments.
And you say, well, isn't that kind of silly? Well, maybe it isn't because life itself
biology is the same thing. We have all these species that eat each other and come on in different
shapes and different forms and so on and there's a contest going on all the time to prove whether
the cats are more powerful than the mice or the humans than the rats and there's constant thing
is going on but it is the same kind of bubbly bubbly bubble. Only it takes instead of such a simple
word as bubbly, which is a vibration in the air, it comes on as a mouse and a mouse is a very
complicated way of saying bubbly. And so in all this you see when when when you get it, when you
get a game going of this kind, there comes the point of what you might call emotional investment
when you feel that the outcome of this particular feature in the game is urgent. See, this matters
and you do you see that that's what we mean by matter. The word matter meaning something substantial,
something material, also means important. It matters and it's up to you what you think matters.
We teach our children what matters, what's important for them to learn and we teach them basically
that it's important to live. You must go on. That's terribly important. When you get a skits
a frenic child or a Mongolian so-called Mongolian idiot, these children don't realize that it's
important to go on and they don't give it down and they are very happy but from our point of view
incompetent, unadapted to society useless because they don't understand why it's necessary
to go on living. They're just going to have a ball where they are and generally what we would say
goof off. And in a way every being in this world is torn between going on and goofing off.
We feel that's the basis of our distinction between work and play. Play is everybody needs some
time to goof off but they must go back to work because you've got to farm and fish and manufacture
and produce so that you can go on. But when you see you have this terrifying urgency to go on
and feel you must, this is important, this matters. We screen out of our consciousness the fact that
this is our own volition and our own game because we are captivated by the illusion of the
necessity and the importance of going on to keep other people going on to keep children going on
to keep this thing up. And the difficulty is that as we become disturbed and anxious about this
it's more difficult to keep the game going. In proportion as we are frightfully concerned to survive
we start fighting other people. We start clobbing our neighbors, we're stealing our crops
and whatever it is, it's all the old fights start and it is these fights which more than anything
else at the moment to see are endangering the entire human project. But all based fundamentally
on the illusion that it's utterly important that we survive. A little while before he died Robert
Oppenheimer said it is perfectly obvious that the whole world is going to hell.
It's going to blow up that is no way that it can be stopped except that we don't try to stop
it happening because you see the panic what's going to happen if this bomb goes off. See
this more than anything else will make it go off because it's like a person who's looking
down over a precipice and starts to get unreasonable. He's terrified to fall over it and therefore
suddenly all the strength goes out of his fingers and his legs get wobbly and he's ready to fall
simply because of his fear falling. But you see in all this what underlies is the illusion
that I am going on, that I constitute a real continuity from this moment to the next moment to the next
moment. What are you afraid of losing when you die? Why? All the capital you've acquired during
your life, the experiences, the friends, the status, the skills, everything that you remember
would be destroyed ordinarily when you die. In other words we are afraid of losing the past.
Now it's perfectly obvious to me that when you die,
yes, everything that you've acquired has an individual and stored in your brain is dissolved and distributed.
But at the same time it is equally obvious that you are not going to
that when you die there won't be following the moment of death ever lasting nothingness.
That would be as ridiculous as to suppose that you were immediately to heaven and join the
saints and angels. The point is that when you die, you're always reborn
the day no vote. That is to say just as you were before. When you came into this world
there gradually arose into being the sensation of eye and it stays there a while it goes
through a development and then it drops off. But all the time everywhere there are other eyes
starting up. See, whether they be human, animal, anything you like, there be in other galaxies,
et cetera, always they are starting up. Now, what you would say is there is no connection between them.
No, in the same way there is no connection between the molecules in your hand.
And yet you say it is a hand. But if you look at it under a powerful enough microscope,
the molecules in your hand are miles apart. And you would say there is no connection between them.
What's the connection between this galaxy and other galaxies? Well we can't see any connection.
And yet there are gravitational swings whereby they respond to each other and move in a certain
collective order. So in a very similar way, the constant appearance of beings who feel that they are
eye constitute a wave motion. And they may be considered individually. See, what we're doing in this,
is not setting down a doctrine, but it is doing an exercise in perception.
You can see it either way, you can see yourself in other words, as existing only now,
that's the only you there is. The alternative to that, logically, is to see yourself as everything.
Either it must be that you exist a finger like that. You're a point-instant,
pung. You know, if you go into the film or auditorium and dance, they turn on the
stroboscopic light. Going very rapidly, brilliant light, on and off, on and off, on and off.
And it seems that everybody is all the time going in and out of existence. See?
Now, in a way, that's a kind of exemplification of the truth that we are vibrations.
And that everything does go on and off on and off on and off all the time.
So the only real thing is the moment of on where you are now, got it, got it, got it, got it, got it,
got it, lost it, see? That's the only thing that's real. That's one poll. The other poll is the view that
all these on and off, just like the molecules in your hand, constitute a continuous reality.
But if you follow that line, you've got to add up not to just what you are at this moment.
You're going to add up to the whole universe through the entire span of its existence in space and time.
Any middle position you take between these things is arbitrary.
Say, okay, I'm going to be so much. I'm going to call myself this particular human being.
You'll live for such and such at a time.
Okay, that's the way you want to play the game. Now, as the rules you've been told,
and if you want to get attached to that and hang up on that, you're going to say that matters.
And so you feel material.
And the Buddhist idea is simply saying, don't get hung up on a, what is called in Sanskrit,
Dhrishty, Dhrishty means a view, a particular way of looking at things.
You say, that's, looking at it from this point of view, this is the way it seems to me to be.
And I'm going to stick for that. I'm going to get hung up on that. That is the meaning of attachment.
So, in Sanskrit, the word Sakaya Dhrishty means the view of separateness.
The view that this, the separation of a certain bundle of
wiggles, taken out of the total wiggliness of all that there is, is me.
And another bundle of wiggles is very definitely you, and it gets stuck on that, you see.
And therefore, to start a fight about it, therefore to start crying and weeping and gnashing of teeth,
all about this thing being real, see.
That is what these people are trying, all these Buddhist sayages and Hindu sayages, to get people off that hang-up.
And say, wake up, wake up, wake up. Don't you understand the whole things in illusion?
Not that this is a word to put it down and say that it's horrible or bad.
If you could see that the whole thing is in illusion, you would be happy as a lock.
And life would be lived much more joyous than if I have everybody. We would dance together and give things away
and stop fighting. See, if we really saw it was in illusion, we'd all be happy in our big dream.
But we are constantly saying to ourselves and we are saying to our children,
it's real. God, David, it's real. And death is going to be awful. And sickness is going to be horrible.
You see, it's real. And you better watch out. See, you can say people say to me,
you can say as a philosopher, that all this thing is under. You can talk this way because you're sitting in a comfortable place.
You've got plenty to eat. But you watch when the thing hits you, you'll laugh the other side of your face.
Well, I don't give a damn.
When it happens, it'll happen. It is not happening now.
And what I'll do when it does happen is these sufficient done to the day is the trouble they're off.
As if you let yourself be free to react as nature dictates when catastrophe falls.
You'll be okay. But if you go through your whole life, standing in the state of preparation for catastrophe.
You know what's going to happen?
You just torment yourself and get ulcers and rotting of the brain long before it's necessary for that to happen.
In this seminar on birth, death, and the unborn, we've been discussing the Buddhist philosophy of change
of life as a flowing dynamic pattern process.
Which is essentially immaterial because it isn't anything you can grasp. We use the word substance.
We use the word solid. We use the word matter. For something you can catch hold of or stand on or
rely on or cling to. And the basis of the Buddhist philosophy of change is that there is nothing
of the kind. There is nothing to hang on to, nothing to rely on, nothing to cling to. But
when we say you see something matters, the word has a double meaning in that it means that it's
substantial and that it's important. And so we are brought up from birth to play the game of life
in a certain way. There are certain things we are told by adults who were told by their adults who
were told by their adults that these things matter. And one of the fundamental things that matters
is that you go on living. And so everybody is tremendously concerned with the things that matter
that they've been taught to value. And because these things actually don't matter, that is to say
because they are not substantial. But they're all a flowing pattern, as I illustrated, a flame
seems to be a substantial object that's there. And if the burn units watch it for a long time,
actually it's a stream of hot gas. And so likewise, the human organism is a stream of energy.
It's never the same for two seconds. Only we've been taught to watch that thing and to cherish it
and value it and it matters, damn it. And yet it's going to wear out and yet it's going to get sick
and yet it's going to die. So everybody is involved in playing the game of life
in a way that goes beyond play and becomes deadly serious. And as a result,
the whole of existence is lived in a state of constant frustration because you are trying
all the time to hold together and to preserve something which in the long run can't be preserved at all.
And therefore, in response to this cry of pain which everybody puts up as a result of being
in this situation, trying to hold on to things. The wisdom of the various ways of liberation
be they Hindu Buddhist or whatever is saying to everybody, look now, cool it. Wake up, see what the
scene is. This is the kind of thing that's going on and you are not a captive in a trap.
You're not just some mere little measly being that somehow our other was brought into an insane
universe, but you are what the thing is. You are not the victim. You are the system.
Only you have identified yourself with a one wave in it and have forgotten that you are
one with the whole energy that's going on, but what you're doing is you have got a particular
way that is to say a particular accumulation of memories of associations, of skills, of things
that you've learned and you don't want to let go of them because you found in that
accumulation of memories which you call yourself an identity. So you know where you are or think
you do. But actually you don't need to be anywhere. Where is the universe? You know, think up an
answer to that one and so the question where is the universe is really, ultimate to the same
question as where are you. So what this is saying is look, let go. It's all right to play the game,
be involved and work out the various intrigues, problems, creative projects and so on that life
involves that's fine. But if you get involved in it so that you are hung up,
this deprives you of delight and joy in playing the game. So the point is to get people unhung up
on the whole thing which in the way we have been accustomed to translate Sanskrit Chinese,
we have been calling unattached but unhung up is much better. It's a much clearer. This
colloquial phrase a hang-up is a much more direct and exact translation of what the Sanskrit word
clasher means than attachment or evil passion or something like that. Clasher is hang-up.
It is blocking, being fixed on a particular point of view and I was trying to show you this morning
that we can take ever so many different points of view towards what's going on. No point of view
is the right one, infinitely many points of view are possible but if you take a point of view
and you insist that's the only point of view then you're hung up on it. If for example you take
the point of view that there are only two kinds of human beings, men and women and the
either you are a man or you are a woman. That's a hang-up because actually we vary a great deal.
There are men who have much more feminine elements in them than others and women who have much
more masculine elements in them than other women and so there is an enormous variation.
But so long as you insist that black is black and white is white and that there are
Republicans and Democrats and capitalists and communists and good guys and bad guys it's a hang-up.
So also between what is you and what is other than you?
Well that's the general area of what we were discussing this morning and now I want to go further
in explaining what I started out to explain which is the basic Buddhist idea of rebirth
of being reincarnated. I said that this was not in Buddhism the idea that one has a kind of
spiritual spook or astral spook or soul which travels from one life to another. It is a
much simpler idea than that but it's so simple that it's difficult to explain. I would begin
you see with the assumption that every person, every sentient being whatsoever, is I.
I is simply the universe aware of itself at a particular place in time. That's what the word
I means. William James once said the word I is a noun of position like this or here and so the
feeling that we call I is how everything feels on the inside but it is always in a particular place
at a particular tone and these particular places in particular times they keep going on and on and on
on and on. Mirriots often all over not only on this globe but probably in well scattered throughout
the whole cosmos, the eye feeling arises and you feel that you are I just as much as I feel that I am
I and your eye feeling and my eye feeling are essentially the same. Only we're looking from different
places but it's all one eye. Only we don't see this because we are hung up on the coming and going of I
on the particular circumstances in which every eye appears and so just as the flame changes
its physical identity every second every split second every micro second so do you you are a stream
and so taking us all together it's buzzing you watch the human race from a very different point of view
you were watching us you didn't know anything about human beings never seen them before and you
were observing what's going on in this planet from some other point of culture in space and time
and you would say well this world is people in this planet peoples just like a tree bears fruit
and year after year the apples that come off an apple tree all look very much the same
and you would say the apples come and go but they're always the same apples coming back
it's only if you look very minutely at the apples and started the details of coloration
and formation that you would say that one apple was different from another. Now we are also used to each
other and we know each other so well that we see and emphasize the differences between us
but somebody who knew nothing about humanity would see the coming and going of human beings
as a repetition of the same process just as the flame burning we say it's a flame but it's a
repetition of the same process it keeps on flaming
you see now if you're going to count each chart as a distinct and separate event
then you cannot hear the rhythm so because of our myopia because our point of view is
fascinated by the details and the differentiation between everything that's going on
the differentiation between people the differentiation between generations we are so preoccupied
with that particular view of things that we're hung up on it and we don't see that it's the same
thing happening again and again and again and that every eye that comes into this world is you
now you don't have to have any inside information to understand that it doesn't require any sort
esoteric spooky knowledge something that can't be demonstrated it's just looking at things the
way they are standing right out in the open and facing you or eyes are eye wherever so ever
scattered because you see this is the place at the point called here and now this universe
knows itself on the inside you look around you and you see everything as it were presenting
an exterior to you. Opposing I want to delve into another person how am I going to do that
there are many ways I can talk to them I can get them to express their in most thoughts and their
feelings I can make love to another person an exchange of very fundamental sort of electrochemical
union I can take a knife and like a surgeon go in and analyze but my relationship to the other
is always seeing life on the outside however much I get down to the tiniest cells that constitute
your nervous system I'm still looking at that cell from the outside if I go down into the molecules
I go down into the atoms I'm still regarding from from the outside the only point at which I know
the thing on the inside is where I am then I have inside knowledge of what everywhere else appears
to be outside so if you want to know what it's what all this is that's why mystics say you have to look
within that say so they talk about the inner life within yourself and so on as that's the point
at which you know what it's like on the inside and so to realize inside there must of course
at the same time be outside to realize self there must be the counterbalance of other because
this like black and white is like back in front they're inseparable so then this is where we start
from that every being coming into this world is I and they keep on coming
doesn't matter how long the intervals are between their appearances posing this planet
we're completely wiped out by a cobalt bomb explosion that would be the end of this race
in just the same way as say a group of insects will eat their food supply up on a plant
and the whole population will perish happens again and again and so with all probability
throughout this galaxy and throughout other galaxies there are human or comparable populations
that arise and go arise and go just as we do individually so don't get too worried about the
thought that this whole human system on this planet may go away and disappear because if you get
to worry about it it's going to happen faster than if you don't worry about it because of the
attraction of a vertigo the feeling of wanting to throw yourself over the precipice even though
you know it will destroy you but it seems perfectly reasonable to suppose in other words that there
is a constant rhythm of what we call consciousness being awake to life going on and on just as
stars go on and on if the stars are going on all over the place if galaxies are going on all over the
place it's equally reasonable to suppose that life is going on all over the place and although the
distances from our particular point of view between these islands of life may be vast don't forget
that the distances between the molecules in your own body are equally vast on their scale
you could go down and blow up the inside of your own head so that the various elements would be
hundreds of miles away from each other and yet some are other they hang together don't be deceived
because distance space isn't just removal space isn't just nothing
this is the grand delusion that space is somehow a thing to be ignored
when but when but is say that the root of frustration or ducca is avidya avidya means ignorance
ignoring not knowing and this is a very clearly explainable in terms of the gistaut theory of
perception the gistaut theory of perception is that we notice the figure and ignore the background
we notice what is a relatively small enclosed space and ignore the more dispersed
we notice what moves against what is relatively still and what is relatively still is ignored
so likewise when we get a constant stimulus of consciousness we begin to ignore it
and not to notice it a consciousness tends always to notice novel things novel changes in the
environment so everything that the most unnoticed things in life are those which are the most constant
and the most regular and because you see you lose touch with the most constant and the most regular
things you screen them out of your your general thought is insignificant they don't matter they're
not there and the most ignored thing is space because space is always the background the solids are
the figures and therefore we say simply space is just nothing it may be filled around this planet
for little distance with air which is important because you do this a while and you notice something
seeing there's some bush going on but out there space that's nothing at all we come to the
Michaelson Molly experiment show there isn't even ether in it and so we say that is nothing
but all that is saying is that that is the background to every figure and as the figure cannot
be there without the background the solid cannot be there without the space and so the space
of the world is the one thing we've forgotten and the one thing that is absolutely essential
to the being anything at all but because in every direction the stimulus of space is a constant
we don't notice it just in the same way you don't notice when you hear music on the phonograph
you don't consider the fact that all the music that you hear is a vibrating diaphragm
whether it imitate strums, flutes, human voices it's still a vibrating diaphragm but that's
ignored we don't say that's not important but it is important because without the vibrating
diaphragm there wouldn't be any music at all space then likewise is everywhere but we ignore it
because it's common to everything a constant stimulation of consciousness is forgotten
so then we must realize that what we call separate things separate molecules
separate lives separate planets separate star separate galaxies are joined by space
space in other words is a relationship between solids you would not be able to think about space
without a relationship between solids and so the whole theory of rebirth in Buddhism
is based on intervals not on a transmigrating soul but upon intervals between lives
because it's the interval that's important just as in the same way when you listen to music
you hear melody simply because you hear the interval between the tones
if you couldn't hear that interval you would not hear melody tone deaf people cannot hear melody
they hear merely a succession of sounds and they can't understand why other people enjoy this
because they haven't got the capacity to hear the interval between tones following each other in succession
or the intervals between tones played simultaneously as in a chord
isn't that magical when you come to think of that music is created by not so much the tones as
the distance the musical or sonic space between them but so goes for everything
it is how it is spaced that creates the significance and interest of any
being whatsoever you say for example the human body consists of about 95 cents worth of chemicals
but how it's arranged playing a violin by a great master is just scraping cats
entrails with horse hair but how it's done see so the the order of the way things are
distributed is the magic and that requires the spacing how it is spaced and so architects they
understand that space is real because they're always they talk about using space when they first
listen to architects talking a very puzzled because the an architect will use an expression like
the function of a space and the ordinary persons is how can space have a function how can nothing do
something when the physicists speaks of space being curved how the devil can space be curved how
can it be properties of space because the average person is simply brought up to ignore space
has being total non-in today so then it is spaces between what we'll call solids
instance points that makes it possible for the points to have some point
draw if everything was point nobody will be able to make up one point from another so it has to be
indable so likewise then when it comes to considering relationships between lives
your past life or past incarnation your future incarnation to understand this problem I repeat
you do not need any spukery it is all perfectly obvious and I'm going to demonstrate it to you
by playing a game with pebbles
now I've scattered these pebbles at random all over the floor
and let's consider for the sake of argument that each pebble is a human life
and you see the the slats of the floor going across this way they may be taken to represent
each one a century in time clock time calendar time
and so here are human lives all of different sizes lengths that is to say
different breadth how much they traveled how much space they occupied
scattered right across the period of time and we are looking at them from a sort of celestial
position for the kind of I have God and seeing history happening scattered all over the place
now one of the first things that we do when we see a scattered arrangement of this kind
the first thing may be say oh it's just a mess
and the second thought it seems to have some lines of continuity in it
because especially you see as you can make out very quickly you can pick out a line
you know how you do this lying in bed in the morning and looking at a chins curtain or lying in
hospital and looking at patterns on the ceiling you start to pick out designs and themes
Leonardo da Vinci used to look at dirty old walls where there's moisture and damp and mold
and see in those walls all kinds of paintings that he could therefore bring out the the glorious
cave paintings which are found in the south of France by most prehistoric men they're done by
what's called idetic vision those people looked in the caves at the patterns on the wall
and in them they saw cattle people and they simply touched them up and therefore got the most
vividly realistic impressions it's called idetic vision so in just the same way in looking at
the scatter of pebbles on the floor you can with idetic vision pick out certain continuity
so if for example we it's very easy you see as things are to spot this line it's almost
straight line and a straight line is an abstract concept which is useful to us see I noticed there's
all lined up like that now is there a line there or isn't there how real is the line
there was no intention to make a line these are just weather things fall but they do so this
particular set of pebbles happens to be pretty much in a straight line now the straight line is a concept
it isn't something in the actual pebbles you know at the same time I can see it that way
so then we might argue if each of the pebbles in that line is representing the lifetime of a human being
because they are lined up in this way you can say that is a continuity in other words
this one here reincarnates as this one and then is this one because they continue each other
and form the line we talk about a line of descent a line of succession well that's what happens
and you see that continuity in this system just as you see the continuity of a wave moving
across the water although actually nothing is moving the water is just going up and down
so you would see the continuity of this so in the same way as I explained this morning you consider
the two sitting here are the same people who came in at the door although you're not you've changed
completely so this in other words if I insist upon seeing this continuity of lives
then I'm reincarnating if I realize however that my seeing of a line here is purely a projection
I'm not reincarnating I'm liberated
or we could do it in some other way you don't have to see a straight line to make the connections
let's imagine that these are all pebbles in the stream and what will make connections between them
for a little fellow who is walking around you see and he wants to get across the stream
and so we put his foot on a pebble here and what next one can he reach you can get to that one
and then you get to that one wow he's going to have a little problem to go on from that see
but maybe with a jump he can land on that and then on that one and whoops with a jump he can hit that
and that one see it all depends on the stretch that one that one that one that one you see and
because they they're each within a stretch then that's another reason for setting up a line of continuity
being able to see a significant connection between any of the members of the group
so what you're doing here you see you are making sense out of a whole multitude of
human lives in just exactly the same way that you make sense out of anything else
are the way you make sense out of a raw shark plot but after all the whole world is a raw shark plot
everything in it is what we are doing is we're making sense out of wiggly processes
there is you see humanity wherever you fly across the world in a plane and the landscape suddenly
begins to look rectangular where the restraint lines and clear triangles or clear circles you
know human beings have been around where they haven't been around the outlines of everything
a wiggly like the courses of rivers the shapes of mountains and forests because human beings are
always trying to straighten things out but the we ourselves are not straightened out we are wiggles
and we're in terminably wiggling but we are trying to regulate our wiggling by setting
ourselves up in houses and going along the streets with traffic lights and regulations and so on
but we are wiggling we're trying to straighten out this wiggling but wiggling is basic
so the whole world especially us is a raw shark plot and science is the art of trying to make
unanimous sense of this block what science does is it isn't that there are certain fixed laws of
nature which things are bay it isn't as if the wiggly events of the world are running on
tram lines and they have to they have to do that they don't have to
point is that in order to make sense out of what is going on there's no way of making sense
because sense and order of the same thing therefore we invent orders and describe the way things fit them
in other words here is the scatter of stones but it just so happens that I scatter them over
a regularly spaced floor each of these divides in the planking is even
and so I can classify every stone according by by numbering the board which it's on
and by doing that I'll be able to identify them and I'll be able to talk about various regularities
in the way you see I threw them all out like that and there were certain dynamic principles involved
and these principles can be measured and discussed in terms of the intervals at which all the stones fell
but in in in fact though I invented the order that order of distances between the divides and the
boards is just as much a projection on the formation of the stones as considering for example
that this group lie in a straight line something projected on it so in just this way therefore
we are projecting on to a wiggly universe in order see anyway to make sense out of it
and to a very certain because after all wiggles although they are very irregular
there is regularity in them and you can only know that there's regularity in wiggles
because there's also irregularity in vice versa so through noticing the regularities you begin to
make out a consistency in the behavior of events and if you dig consistency and say great let's
do it again you say this is this was fine oh that wiggle was beautiful once more please yeah see
then then you dig irregularities and you don't want it to be irregular because gee if I will
be anywhere I have no idea what was going to happen next no suddenly there's going to be an earthquake
suddenly bang the whole thing's going to vanish well I don't know what's going to happen bang shoot that
could be crazy be great you know but well we we don't really settle for that we like the two
things go to put them put them put them put them put them put them put them put them put themselves
long as it doesn't get too monotonous and boring so therefore we are looking we're scanning
all the time the field of experience for regularities and thus build up our hang-ups
it's got to happen every day the males got to be delivered every day you know we've got to keep
in your work got to eat regular meals all I kind of jazz you see and so it keeps going because
we're looking for this regularity thing but once again you see the Buddhists say do you know
this thing actually is neither regular nor irregular you can pick out what you do do what you want
with it like here the chips what value do you want to put on them what pattern do you want to see
in or do you want to see them in what Buddhists call their suchness see that's the point of the
garden the sand and rock garden at Rio Grande you go there and you see a lovely great stretch of
white sand five rocks on it and that's what those Zen boys made up and why do they get away with murder
set up those rocks in the garden you see and everybody comes around and looks at it I think
there's must be some deep meaning in this and so there's a little guidebooks that explain
that what it's supposed to be they say well it's supposed to be an ocean with islands in it
other people say oh it's a beach with rocks on it other people say oh well these rocks have a
certain dynamic relationship and they represent kinds of Buddhist principles and there's a guy
at Dyson in where they have another rock in sand garden a very funny cute Zen monk who gives
an lecture in English he doesn't speak English but he's memorized a particular English lecture
which explains the symbolism of all the various rocks and how they work out and how eventually you
get to the ocean of liberation all this is made up out of whole cloth because the whole point of
Zen garden is just that it doesn't mean any more than this means or any more than anything else means
the mountain over here the fact of water the fact of coastline goes in such and such a way
and here are we all sitting around wiggling you know only because I'm talking
and you've attributed certain sense to my words and so on you think that I'm communicating something
but actually everything that we're doing is like this now we are brought up to think oh that's too bad
if that's all it is you see if it's just this suchness if it's just an arrangement that fell out like that
what's the point? Life seems meaningless and empty and without purpose and so on but that's
just because you're geared you've been conditioned through all your thinking to feel that things aren't
meaningful unless they're meaningful when you say well life doesn't have any meaning that's
because you've added drilled into you that it ought to have so you make a meaning out of it
and if on the other hand nobody ever told you that life ought to have a meaning and that it ought
to make some sense that ought to be going somewhere and that you should survive then you wouldn't
expect it you just dig it as it happens so really what this is saying is it isn't that things are
meaningless it isn't that they're meaningful it's just that they are so happen to be spread this way
and so there is no fixed way you should look at it so what is called as the first principle of
the Buddha's eightfold path samyak thrifty means samyak perfect thrifty view
Suzuki once was giving a lecture about Buddhism you know and he said
fourth noble truth of Buddhism is called a noble rightful path
first step of noble eightfold path course sure can mean right view or a Buddhism samyak in right view
second step of noble eightfold path is oh I forgot second step you better knock it up in the book
right view doesn't mean right in the sense of the particular correct view one should take
it means the complete view which is having no fixed view so in other words when you say what is
the correct position of the stars in the great deeper the big deeper depends where you're looking
from there is no such thing as the correct position of those stars so in the same way what is the
what is the right interpretation of these pebbles depends how you want to look at it
there was a Zen master called ikyu in the front of his monastery he had a very very
novel crooked pine tree and one day he pinned a notice on it which said I will pay 1,000 yen
to anybody who can see this tree straight so all kinds of people came around the tree and started
standing on their heads and looking at it in weird ways see if somehow they could line up the
branches to see them all straight and there was one very smart man who came and looked at this
for a while and then he went off to see another priest who was a friend of ikyu's and he said look what
is this thing ikyu's doing how would you see that tree straight what he said you look straight at it
so he went back to ikyu and said I claim one thousand yen you all you have to do to see the
tree straight is to look straight at it and ikyu looked at him in a very funny way the forked out
the thousand yen and said you must have been talking to my friend the priest down the road
so what are we doing you see you've got you you've got a universe which you're living in
which is fundamentally wiggly like this and you are an event in this wiggle see
only you're trying to straighten it up you're trying to see order and you're doing this
is itself a wiggle after all you may say part of this one or two things in here are straight
and it's their nature to go that way to be orderly things to be straight things or whatever
other quality you want to put on it and we are like that we are something in this which has it in
its nature to arrange it this in that way to want to see things straight but actually there really isn't
anything in the whole arrangement that is the right way of doing it and there isn't anything in life
in your life that is supposed to happen it you you're not supposed to live to be 80 or to
die when you're 23 it doesn't make the slightest difference you can be one of the others while
they say in the scenery of spring there is nothing superior nothing inferior flowering branches
grown naturally some short some long so liberation is the realization there is no way that things are supposed to be
you don't have to go on living
you are you know you're what there is it's up to you to decide see there's no way it has to have
but on the other hand if you want to feel that there is somewhere you would like to arrange this
I mean we can start pushing these things around you know and put them in some kind of an order
that's okay too
the point being you will be miserable to the degree that you are hung up on the notion
that things should must go a certain way that is to say to have a fixed view if you have no fixed view
you remain elastic and about this there is always something that can't quite be said
when we say I have no fixed view it sounds as if I were just an on interview like a moron
Chinese proverb says as a hollow room echoes all sounds an empty mind is open to all suggestions
but there's another sense of an empty mind and that not the moronic empty mind but the lively empty mind
the empty mind that can either let it alone or project patterns on it
and especially do both so that instead of saying what you really ought to do is to project no pattern
under the well and realize that it's all fundamentally senseless is to say always do both
of the same time project the patterns that realize at the same time there is no fixed view
that you should take this is exactly the same thing as being able to realize that
there are rights and wrongs and things that should be done and should not be done but at the same
time there's another point of view from which you can see that everything that happens is right the way it is
and that human life never makes an aesthetic mistake just as the patterns of the clouds and of the
foam never make aesthetic mistakes
