This seminar is about a very sticky problem, which is to say the problem to which the Buddha primarily addressed himself, which is that of agony, suffering.
But before we get into that, we have to be clear about certain basics.
And these basics have to do not so much with concepts and ideas.
As they do with the state of mind, we could call it also a state of feeling, the state of sensation, the state of consciousness,
and we need to understand that even being that before we can really go very far.
And this is an extraordinarily difficult state of mind to talk about, even though in its nature it's extremely simple.
Because it is in a way like we were when we were babies.
When we hadn't been told anything and didn't know anything other than what we felt and we had no names for it.
Now, of course, as we grow older, we learn to differentiate one thing from another, one event from another,
and above all ourselves from everything else.
Well, and good.
Provided you don't lose the foundations.
Just as mountains are differentiated, but they're all based on the earth.
So, the multiple things of this world are differentiated.
But they have as it were a basis.
There is no word for that basis, not really, because words are only for distinction.
And so there can't really be a word, not even an idea of the non distinction.
We can feel it, but we can't think it.
But we don't feel it like an object.
You feel your alive.
You feel your conscious, but you don't know what consciousness is because consciousness is present in every conceivable kind of experience.
It's like the space in which we live, which is everywhere.
It's like a fish being in water, and presumably a fish doesn't know it's in the water, because it never goes out.
A bird presumably knows nothing of the air, and we really know nothing of consciousness, and we pretend space isn't there.
So, however, when you grow up and become fascinated, which is really the right word, spellbound and junted, by all the things that adults weigh that you.
You forget the background, and you come to think that all the distinctions which you've been learning are the supremely important things to be concerned with.
You become hypnotized, and so when we are told to pay attention to what matters, we get stuck with it, and that's what in Buddhism is called attachment.
It doesn't mean that you enjoy your dinner or that you enjoy sleeping or beauty.
Those are responses of our organism in its environment as natural as feeling hot near a fire or cold near ice.
So, our certain responses of fear are of sorrow. They are not attachment. Attachment is exactly translated by the modern slang term, henna.
It's a kind of stickiness, or what in psychology would be called blocking when you are in a state of wobbly hesitation, not knowing how to flow on that's attachment.
What is meant by the Sanskrit word, clasher.
So, when the chicken has its beak put to the chalk line, it's got to hang up. It's stuck on that line.
And so, in the same way, we get to hang up on all the various things that we are told as we grow up by our parents, our aunts and uncles, our teachers, and above all by our peer group.
And the first thing that everybody wants to tell us is the difference between ourselves and the rest of the world.
And between those actions which are voluntary, and those which are involuntary, what we do on the one hand, and what happens to us on the other.
And this is, of course, immensely confusing to a small child, because it's told to do all sorts of things that are really supposed to happen, like going to sleep, like having bowel movements, like loving people, like not blushing, stopping being anxious, and all sorts of things like that.
So, what happens is this.
The child is told in some, that we, your parents, elders and betters, command you, to do what will please us only if you do it spontaneously.
And no wonder everybody is completely confused. We go through life with that burden on us.
So, we therefore develop this curious thing. We develop a thing which is called an ego.
Now, I've got to be very clear to you what I mean by ego.
And ego is not the same thing as a particular living organism.
For my philosophy, the particular living organism, which is inseparable from a particular environment that is to say from the universe as centered here and now.
There's something real, which isn't the thing I call it a feature of the universe.
But what we call our ego is something abstract, which is to say it has the same order and kind of reality as an hour or an inch or a pound or a line of longitude.
It is for purposes of discussion. It is for convenience. In other words, it is a social convention that we have what is called an ego.
But the fallacy that all of us make is that we treat it as if it were a physical organ.
As if it were real in that sense, when in fact it is composed on the one hand of our image of ourselves, that is our idea of ourselves as when we say to somebody you must improve your image.
Now this image of ourselves is obviously not ourselves. Any more than an idea of a tree is a tree. Any more than you can get wet in the world water.
And to go on with our image of ourselves is extremely inaccurate and incomplete, with that some got the gifted gears to see ourselves as others see us.
We don't. So my image of me is not at all your image of me. And my image of me is extremely incomplete and that it does not include any information to speak of.
About the functioning of my nervous system, my circulation, my metabolism, my subtle relationships with the entire surrounding human and nonhuman universe.
So the image I have of myself as a caricature, it is arrived at through mainly my interaction with other people who tell me who I am in various ways, either directly or indirectly.
And I play about with what their picture is of me and they play something back to me so that we set up this conception and this started very, very early in life.
I was told you see and you were told that we must have a consistent image. You must be you. You have to find your identity in terms of image.
And this is an awful red herring. A lot of the current quest for identity among young people is a search for an acceptable image.
What role can I play? Who am I in the sense of what am I going to do in life and so on? Now, while that has a certain importance, if it's not backed up by deeper matters, it's extraordinarily misleading.
So therefore on the one hand, there is this image which is intellectual, emotional, imaginative and so forth.
But we would say I don't feel that I am only an image. I feel there's something more real than that because I feel I mean I have a sense of their being a particular sort of how do we say?
A center of something, some sort of sensitive core inside the skin and that corresponds to the word I. Let's take a look at this.
Because the thing that we feel as being myself is certainly not the whole body, because a lot of the body can be seen as an object.
In other words, if you stand, stretch yourself out, lie on the floor, turn your head and look at yourself. You know, you could see your feet and your legs and all this up to here and finally it all vanishes only this is sort of a vague nose in front.
And you assume you have a head because everybody else does and you've looked in a mirror and that told you you had a head, but you could never see it just like you can't see your back.
So you tend to put your ego on the side of the unseen part of the body.
The part you can't get out because that seems to be where it all comes from and you feel it.
But what is it that we feel because if I see clearly, and my eyes are in functioning order, the eyes certainly are not conscious of themselves, the nose spots in front of them, no defects in other words in the lens or in the retina or in the optic nerves that give hallucinations.
So also therefore, if my ego, my consciousness is working properly, I ought not to be aware of it as something sort of there being a nuisance in a way in the middle of things because your ego is awfully hard to take care of.
Well, what is it then that we feel? Well, I think I've discovered what it is.
It's a chronic habitual sense of muscular strain, which we would taught in the whole process of doing spontaneous things to order.
When you're taking off in a jet plane, and the thing has gone rather further down the runway than you think it should have without getting up in the air, you start pulling it to your seatbelt, get this thing off the ground, perfectly useless.
So in the same way, when our community tells us, look carefully, now listen, pay attention, we start using muscular strains around our eyes, ears, jaws, hands, to try to use our muscles to make our nerves work, which is of course futile.
And in fact, it gets in the way of the functioning of the nerves, try to concentrate.
And then when we try to control our emotions, we hold our breath, pull our stomachs in, or tighten our rectal muscles.
To hold ourselves together, now pull yourself together.
Immediately, what are you to do? What is a child understand by that? He does it muskily, pulls himself together, this is useless.
So everybody, chronically pulls themselves together, so that it's so funny if you get a person that just lie on the floor and relax.
Without the floor, our knee with firmness can be holding you up.
Nevertheless, you would detect that the person is making all sorts of tensions.
Less tea should suddenly turn into a nasty jello on the floor.
So that chronic tension, which in Sanskrit is called some culture, which means contraction, is the root of what we call the feeling of the ego.
So that in other words, this feeling of tightness is the physical reference for the psychological image of ourselves.
So that we get the ego as the marriage of an illusion to a futile taste.
Even though the idea of an eye with a name, whether a being is naturally useful for social communication,
provided we know what we're doing and take it for what it is.
But we are so hung up on this concept, that it confuses us even in the proposition that it might be possible for us to feel otherwise.
Because we asked the question if we hear about people who have transcended the ego.
Well, we ask, how do you do that? Well, I say, what do you mean? You, how do you do that?
Because the you you're talking about doesn't exist.
So you can't do anything about it. Any more than you can cut a cheese with a line of longitude.
Now that sounds very discouraging, doesn't it?
But let's suppose now you are babies again. And you don't know anything.
Now don't be frightened because anything you know you can get back later.
But for the time being, here is our awareness.
And let's suppose you have no information about this at all and no words for it.
And that my talking to you is just a noise.
Now don't try to do anything about this. Don't make any effort.
Because naturally, by force of habit, certain tensions remain inside you and certain ideas and words drift all the time through your mind.
Just like the wind blows or clouds move across the sky.
Don't bother with them at all. Don't try to get rid of them.
Just be aware of what's going on in your head.
Like it was clouds in the sky or the crackling of the fire.
There's no problem to this. All you have to do really is look and listen without naming.
And if you are naming, never mind. Just listen to that.
Now that you can't force anything here that you can't willfully stop thinking and stop naming.
It's only telling you that the separate you doesn't exist.
It isn't a mark of defeat. It isn't a sign of your lack of practice and meditation.
That it runs on all by itself simply means that the individual separate you is a figment of your imagination.
So you are aware at this point of a happening.
Remember, you don't know anything about the difference between you and it.
You have no words for the difference between inside and outside.
Between here and there.
Nobody has taught you that what you see out in front of you is either near or far from your eyes.
Watch a baby put out a finger to touch the moon.
You don't know about that.
Just therefore, here it is. We'll just call it this and if you will feel it.
The going on, which includes absolutely everything you feel.
Well, whatever that is, it's what the Chinese called Tao, got Buddhist call suchness or Tao Tao.
And it's a happening.
It doesn't happen to you because where is that?
You, what you call you, it's part of the happening.
Or an aspect of it. Has no parts, it's not like a machine.
And it's a little scary because you'd feel who's in control around you.
Why should there be anyone?
That's a very weird notion we have that processes require something outside them to control them.
We'd never occurred to us that processes could be self-controlling.
Even though we say to someone, control yourself.
You know what?
In order to think about self-controll, we split a person into.
So that there's a you separate from the self that's supposed to be controlled.
Well, how can that achieve anything?
How can a noun start a verb?
Yet it's a fundamental superstition that that can be done.
So you have this process, which is quite spontaneous.
Going on, we call it life. It's controlling itself.
It's aware of itself.
It's aware of itself through you.
You are an aperture through which the universe looks at itself.
And because of it's the universe looking at itself through you,
there's always an aspect of itself that it can't see.
So it's like that snake, you see, that is pursuing its tail.
Because the snake can't see its head, like you can't.
So therefore, we always find as we investigate the universe.
Make the microscope bigger and bigger and bigger.
And we will find ever more minute things.
Make the telescope bigger and bigger and bigger.
And the universe expands because it's running away from itself.
It will do that if you don't chase it.
So the universe is chasing its own tails.
It's the thing we're talking about, the style.
And it's a game of hide and seek.
Really, when you ask the question who is doing the chasing,
you are still working on the assumption that every verb has to have a subject.
That when there is an action, there has to be a doer.
But that's what I will call a grammatical convention.
Leading to what Whitehead called, the fallacy of misplaced concreteness.
Like the famous it in it is raining.
So when you say, there cannot be knowing without a knower.
This is merely saying no more than there can't be a verb without a subject.
And that's a grammatical rule and not a law of nature.
Anything you can think of as a thing, as a noun, can be described by a verb.
And there are languages which do that.
It sounds awkward in English, but face it.
When you look for doers as distinct from deeds, you can't find them.
Just as when you look for stuff underlying the patterns of nature, you can't find any stuff.
You just find more and more patterns.
It's never was any stuff. It's a ghost.
What we call stuff is simply patterns seen out of focus.
And it's fuzzy. So we call it stuff.
You're like a K-pop.
So we know we have these words, energy, matter, being reality, even dull.
And we can never find them. It always eludes entirely.
Although we do have the very strong intuition that all this that we see is connected or related.
So we speak of a universe.
Although that word really means one turn.
It's your turn now.
Or like you make one turn to look at yourself.
But you can't make two turns and see what's looking.
It's very simple, therefore.
You only have to understand that you can't do anything about it.
And as they say in Zen, you cannot take hold of it, but you can't get rid of it.
And then not being able to get it, you get it.
So all these trials that gurus put their students through.
Have as their ultimate object convincing you that you can't do anything.
Only is convincing you very thoroughly. It's convincing you in more than a theoretical way.
Now perhaps I shouldn't tell you that.
But you see, I'm not a guru in that I don't give individual spiritual direction to people.
And I give away the guru's tricks that may not be very good, but on the other hand.
Those tricks are only necessary in the sense that I would say to someone,
It's necessary for you to go to a psychiatrist if you think you must.
And if you are not going to be satisfied without going to Japan and studying Zen Buddhism from a Rochi,
OK, you better go.
It isn't necessary unless you say it is.
If that's the only thing that will satisfy you and you feel that deep down inside you.
If you got that young, therefore you've got that young.
But if on the other hand you haven't you haven't.
And I'm not going to put you down on that account, you see.
The point is, what do you want to do? What is it in you to do?
But there it is that you can struggle and struggle and struggle.
And indeed we'll do so as long as you have the feeling inside you that you're missing something.
And people, your friends, all sorts of people will do their utmost to persuade you that you're missing something.
Because they're missing something and they think they're getting it through a certain way.
And therefore to assure themselves they'd like you to do it too.
Service is thing.
And you see, a clever guru, begiles his students.
By letting them have the feeling of success and accomplishment in certain directions.
A guru gives people exercises, a, that are difficult, but can be accomplished and b, that are impossible.
You'll always be hung up on the impossible ones, but the possible ones, you will feel get a feeling of making progress,
so that you will double your efforts to solve the impossible exercises.
And then they range things in many, many ranks and levels through which you can advance.
This state of consciousness, that state of consciousness, I think of the degrees of masonry, or so on.
Ranks in learning things, the different belts you get in judo and all that kind of task.
You can do that and it gives people the sense of competing with themselves or even with others.
Because of the feeling inside that that is just something I'm missing.
And of course, if you are learning any sort of skill and you haven't perfected the skill, there is indeed something you're missing.
But in this thing that we're talking about, that isn't true, because you, as the Buddhists say, are Buddhas from the very beginning.
And all that searching is like looking for your own head, which you can't see and therefore might conceivably imagine that you're lost.
So if that indeed is the point, that we don't see what looks.
And therefore we think we've lost it.
And so we're in search of the self, the oddman.
Well, that's the one thing we can't find.
Because we have it. We are it.
But we could fuse it with all these images.
So therefore, if you understand perfectly clearly that you can't do anything to find that very, very important thing.
God Enlightenment, Nirvana, whatever.
Then what?
Well, I find, you know, it's so stupid because even if I tell myself, well, there's nothing I can do about it.
Why did I say that?
You see, why did I say that?
Why did I go out of my way to tell myself, there's nothing I can do about it?
Because in the back of my mind, there was a funny little feeling that if I did tell myself that something different would happen.
See?
All right. So even that doesn't work. Nothing works.
Now, in absolutely nothing works where are you?
Well, here we are. I mean, there's this feeling of something going on.
The world doesn't stop dead when there's nothing you can do.
There's something happening.
Now, just there, that's what I'm talking about.
If there's the happening.
When you are not doing anything about it, you're not doing anything about it.
You just can't help it.
It goes on despite anything you think or worry about or whatever.
Now, there is the point, right there.
And remember, although you will think at first that this is a kind of determinism.
There are two reasons why it isn't.
One, there is nobody being determined.
Now, other people think of determinism as the direction of what happens by the past,
the causation of what happens by the past.
Now, if you will use your senses, you will see that that is a hallucination.
The present does not come from the past.
If you listen and only listen, close your eyes.
Where do the sounds come from according to your ears?
You hear them coming out of silence.
The sounds come and then they fade off.
They go like echoes for echoes in the labyrinths of your brain, which we call memories.
The sounds don't come from the past.
They come out of now and trail off.
You can do that later with your eyes.
You can see like when you are watching television.
There is a vibration coming out from the screen to your eyes.
And it starts from there somehow.
Because we see the hands and then they move, we think that the movement is caused by the hands.
And that the hands were there before and so can move later.
We don't see that our memory of the hands is an echo of there always being now.
They never were, they never will be, they are always now.
So is the motion.
And that is recollected is the trailing of echo like the wake of a ship.
And so just as the wake doesn't move the ship, the past does not move the present.
Unless you insist that it does.
And if you say, well, naturally I am always moved by the past.
That's an alibi.
And it completely fails to explain how you ever learn anything new.
That's why all the psychologists who are mostly behaviorists are completely bogged down in trying to find the theory of learning.
Because according to the theory of learning that we have, everything that knew that you were assimilated,
is really only learned when translated into terms of what you already know.
So in that sense learning becomes like a library which increases only by the addition of books about books already in it.
And a lot of libraries are indeed like that.
So that's what we call scholasticism.
So then you become aware that this happening isn't happening to you because you are the happening.
The only you there is is what's going on.
Yeah, feel it.
And disregard the stupid distinctions that you've been taught.
I mean stupid relatively speaking.
And feel it genuinely.
When you feel genuine in you get down to rock bottom all that isn't there.
That's a game that's been erected on it.
And it isn't determined.
In other words you get this odd feeling of a synthesis between doing and happening.
In which doing is as much happening as happening.
And happening is as much doing as doing.
And if you're not very careful at that point you'll proclaim yourself God Almighty in the Hebrew Christian sense.
Like Freud alleged his babies feel that they're omnipotent.
And in a way they are.
I am omnipotent in so far as I'm the universe.
But I'm not omnipotent in the role of Alan Watts.
Only cunning.
So now then this sensation of the happening is basic to all we want to explore.
It's there as you see you can't do anything.
And that as you see you can't do anything you don't go and distract yourself with something else.
Like committing suicide or getting drunk or any sort of distraction.
Because if you do that you will miss what follows from the feeling of what is going on when you're not doing anything.
When you're not able even to not do anything.
See this is a sticky place.
You can't get in and you can't get out.
That's why it's called in Zen the mosquito biting the iron bull.
Or the man who swallowed the ball of red hot iron which he can't go down can't spit out.
See it's that difficult. What are you to do or not do? And that tells you you see that dilemma.
That what you saw was you just isn't there at all.
I don't make it difficult because that's a form of evading it.
Don't make it easy. That's a form of evading it.
It's neither difficult nor easy because if it were difficult it would have to be difficult for someone.
If it were easy it would have to be easy for someone.
And the someone we're talking about is just the one that isn't there.
And if you think it is there okay it's a free country you can have that thought but it's a thought.
In other words your ego is a thought among thoughts it is not in fact the controlling thinker or the feeler or the sensor.
It's one of them.
And so therefore this thing is going along.
And as I say we get anxious because we feel nobody's in control but nobody ever was.
You know when you've lived thus far a reasonably orderedly life.
I mean there have been some catastrophes and messes.
But it's amazing how we have got this far.
I mean the thing looks after itself.
And you will well remember that a lot of times that when you thought you were in charge and doing something sensible you did something extremely foolish.
And when you thought you did something extremely foolish it turned out to be a blessing.
But it's the way things go.
Now of course this is a dangerous way of speaking to people who are in process of young people especially who are still in the process of learning elementary competence in the culture.
Learning the taboos and the conventions.
Because we take their minds off the happening.
To do that, it doesn't necessarily do it that way.
It isn't really necessary to turn a child into a moron.
In the process of becoming an adult but that's what we do.
Because we teach a child to be a child.
And that prevents them from growing up.
It's an effort of keeping them off the labor market.
But if you speak to a child from the beginning as if it were an adult.
And talk not baby talk but straight language.
Your child will become master of English language.
Say about three years old.
Certainly in talking it.
And we'll be able to tell you a lot of funny things you don't know.
But then the trouble is you have to send that per thing to school.
And if it is that advanced it will be regarded as a freak.
And have a very bad time of it.
So it will have to conceal itself as a moron.
Sometimes children are brought up without that interruption of being a child.
You know, with all the cutie pie stuff.
And it's what balls me about Christmas.
It's a way of commercializing childhood.
So there's our basic point of departure.
And now we'll have an intermission in which we will have coffee in.
